HCA 13/68 f.1r Annotate

M.M.

The 22th day of September 1653.

The Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority)
of Parliament against a certaine shipp named)
the Golden Starr whereof Michael van Lubken)
was Master and her Tackle and ffurniture and)
whatsoever money plate Jewells pearles sylver)
or other goods ware or merchandizes taken)
and seized in her by certaine shipps in the)
immediat service of this Commonwealth and against)
George Boscha[?vrt] appearing for his Interest)
in certayne parcells of the sayd sylver and against)
all others having or pretending to have and
Claiming or that shall Clayme any right title)
of Interest in the said shipp or any of)
the lading seized in her. Bud. ffrancklyn.)

Examined upon an Allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd Keepers of the Liberty of England by
Authority of the Parliament.

Row dt.

.1.

Mark Harrison of Wapping in
the County of Middlesex Mariner aged
seven and twenty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
the arlate shipp the Golden Starr or Morning Starr and her lading was
taken and seized by certaine shipps in the immediat service of the commonwealth
in the English seas upon the Coast of England, and was first chased by
the arlate shipp the Advantage frigot whereof Captaine Mills was Commander
and was afterwards subdued and taken by the sayd shipp and another shipp
named the Water hound whereof Giles Shelley arlate was Commander
and saith that two shippes were in the immediate service of this Commonwealth
videlicet the Mayflower, and the 10th whelpe were neere and in sight att the
tyme of the sayd seizure. The premisses This deponent knoweth being
master of the Advantage frigott aforesayd and aboard her att the sayd
tyme of seizure. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd shipp the
Golden Starr with her lading in her was subdued and taken by the shipps
aforesayd on or about the 28th day of ffebruary 1652 English stile, and
saith she was then upon the English seas neere Beachy upon the Coast of
Sussex within six leagues or thereabouts of the English shoare when
she was haled chased subdued and taken, which he knoweth being Master
of and aboard the sayd Advantage frigot that gave chase to the sayd ship
Morning starr, and assisted in the subdueing and taking of her as aforesaid
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that upon
the sayd 28th day of ffeburary 1652 and for divers monethes before and
continually since and att this present, there was and is open and publique
warr and hostility betweene this Commonwealth of England and the States
Generall of the united Netherland Provinces and their subiects, and this was
and is true publique and notorious; and was and is as this deponent hath
credibly heard and verily beleiveth, generally knowne and beleived aswell
att Cadiz in Spaine and in fflanders and att hamburgh as att other
ports and places beyond the seas. and the same as this deponent beleiveth
was evident and well knowne to the Captaine Master and Company of the
sayd shipp the Golden Starr. And further he cannot depose.

To the fourth he saith and deposeth that of the sight of this deponent the sayd
shipp the Golden Starr was att the tyme aforesd sayling in that way or Course that lyeth
and leadeth from Beachy towards holland and other parts that are within
the Jurisdiction and obedience of the States of the united Provinces. And
otherwise cannot depose.
To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.1v Annotate

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate shipp
the Golden Starr being upon the English Coast and sayling in her course
as aforesayd was haled or called unto by the Captaine and Company of the
sayd Advantage frigot being come upp to her within pistolls shott and
within hearing; and the master and Company of the Golden Starr were
then demanded to declare and make knowne whence they were and whither
bound, and to send out their boat to the Advantage frigot then wearing
the colours of this Commonwealth, and to submitt themselves to be visited according
to the custome in such cases especially in the tyme of warr, which this
deponent knoweth being present and aboard the Advantage frigott
att the tyme of haling the sayd shipp Golden Starr as aforesd. And otherwise
cannot depose

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the Commander and
Company of the Advantage frigott before they made any shott against the
Golden Starr, being off att a distance gave her 2 or 3 warning peices
without any dammage to her, and not att her or into her, onely to give notice
to her to stay. And further saith when
they in the Advantage frigot came so neer to the Golden Starr as that they
could hale the Golden Starr, and before they gave the Golden Starr any
broad side or made any shott into or against her, the Advantage frigott
had upp and did weare the Colour of this Commonwealth, whereby the master
Captaine and Companie of the Golden Starr might know and perceyve that
the Captaine and Companie of the Advantage frigot were English and
that their shipp was in the service of this Commonwealth, all which this
deponent knoweth being aboard the Advantage frigot, and saw and
observed the premisses to be as he hath now declared. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the premisses
notwithstanding the sayd master and Company of the Golden Starr
delayed to submitt themselves to be visited saying they had not any
boat to send aboard the Advantage frigot to that purpose, and by
their postures and language did evidence it to the deponent and the
rest of the Company of the Advantage that they intended resistance
against the Advantage frigott being but a small shipp and noe
other English shipps at that tyme in sight, whereupon the Advantage
frigot gave fire upon the the Golden Starr, and was immediately
answered in like manner from the Golden Starr, And the Master and Company
thereof violently assaulted and resisted the sayd shipp the Advantage
frigot being in the immediate service of this Commonwealth, and bearing
the Colours thereof, and fought with the Captaine and Company thereof as Enemyes
in an hostile manner, and continued fight with them upon the sayd English
seas att the place aforesayd for three howres and upwards videlicet from
before 9 of the Clock in the morning till about 12 att noone before
any more English shipps came in, and killed some of the Company of the
Advantage, and wounded others, and used their best endeavour with the
shipp
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.2r Annotate

shipp being an able vessell of about 22 Gunnes to sink and destroy the
sayd Advantage frigot, The premisses This deponent knoweth to be true
being aboard the Advantage frigott and engaged in the sayd fight
and seeing and observing the passages aforesd. And othwerwise he cannot
depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the master and Company
of the sayd ship the Golden Starr were haled by the Advantage as aforesayd
they of the Golden Starr of the sight of this Deponent caused a ?Red flagg with a picture of a hand and
word in the same to be putt out att the Maine mast head of the Golden Starr
which this deponent beleiveth they so did in token of defiance of the
sayd shipp the Advantage in the service of this Commonwealth. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the ninth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that during the sayd
fight betweene the Golden Starr and the Advantage ffrigott, the shipp the
Waterhound whereof Giles Shelley was Commander, and some other shipps
of this Commonwealth in the immediate service thereof (and having out and
wearing the Colours of the Commonwealth and none other) came up to aid
and assist the sayd Advantage frigot against the Golden Starr this deponent
seeing when the sayd shipps of this Commonwealth so came upp. And
saith that the Master and Companie of the Golden Starr might see and perceive (and did
see and perceive as this deponent beleiveth) that the sayd ship Waterhound and
the other shipps being the Mayflower and 10th Whelpe aforesd did belong
to this Commonwealth and were in their immediate service. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the sayd shipp
the Water hound came upp with the Golden Starr, and the two other English
shipps came in sight the Master and Company of the Golden Starr continued
the fight for some tyme and fired a Broad side att the Water hound and
wounded the Boatswayne and some others of the Waterhounds Companye
of the certayne knowledge and sight of this deponent. And further saith
that in all the tyme the sayd Master and Companie of the Golden Starr tooke not
downe their Redd flagg or flagg of defiance but the ?same continued still
upp at their maintopmast; till the Waterhounds Company boarded and subdued
and seized the Golden Starr and tooke downe the sayd redd flagg or
flagg of defiance, which he knoweth neing present and aboard the
Golden Starr with or in the said Advantage frigot when the sayd flagg of defiance was taken downe as aforesayd
And otherwise he cannot depose-

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith he cannot
depose.

To the twelfth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith he cannot depose

To the last he saith his depositions are true, And otherwise cannot depose-

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1st he saith he was at the tyme of the taking the sayd shipp the
Golden Starr in this Interrogatory named the Morning Starr, master of
the interrate shipp the Advantage.

To the 2d he saith he was present att the taking and surprizeing of
the interate shipp the Morning Starr or Golden Starr

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.2v Annotate

To the 3d he saith that the interrate shipp the Advantage frigot did
first chase and hale the sayd shipp the Morning Starr or Golden Starr neer four
howres before the interrte shipp the Waterhound came in.

To the 4th he saith the interrte frigot the Advantage did fight with the
sayd shipp the Golden Starr three howres and upwards before the sayd
shipp the Waterhound came in to their ayd and assistance.

To the .5.th he saith the Adventure and Advantage interrte were and are one
and the same shipp, And further saith that he knoweth the interrate shipps
the Advantage and Waterhound, and saith they were and are both of them
dutch built and so were att the tyme of their takeing and surprizeing
of the Morning Star or Golden Star aforesayd.

To the .6.th he saith he was present aboard the shipp Advantage for and during
all the tyme of the ffight interrate from the beginning to the end thereof.

To the .7.th he saith that the Advantage frigott which first chased haled
and fought with the Golden Starr of the knowledge of this deponent
had att the tyme of first haling comeing upp and fighting with the
sayd Golden Starr the English Colours ineky, out, and did then weare them out,
and not any Holland Colours or ffrench Colours, either in her sternes
topmast or maintopmast or elsewhere; But saith that att the tyme
of the first sight of the Golden Starr and att the tyme of shooting
the first warming peices being att a great distance the sayd
Advantage frigott did weare the Holland Colours in ther poope?s
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .8th. he saith that after sayd tyme as the Advantage frigot came
up with the Golden Starr, and the Starr refused to be visited
the Company of the Advantage did shoot part of one broad side with
bullets att the Golden Starr, before the Golden Starr did shoot any
bulletts att the Advantage. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .9.th he saith he doth not know nor hath heard that the Golden Starr
did endeavour to avoyd or decline fighting, but immediately upon the
first fire given in fight by the Advantage, did fire and shoot
against the Advantage and ?hanged up her flagg of defiance
as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the :10.th he saith he doth not beleive or know that when any shipp of
warr at sea open the first haling of another shipp and being to Leeward thereof doth [XXX GUTTER]
the colours of another Republique or State or Prince, and afterwards when
she cometh neere and within haling doth putt out the
colours of any other Commonwealth Prince or State different from the
colo:rs of the first republique Prince of State, such shipps usually [XXXX GUTTER]
or generally taken for a searobber or Pyrate, or the Compan[?ie]
thereof enemyes to that shipp so chased; But saith the same is a
common and usuall policy and stratagem in the tyme of warr. And he
further saith he cannot positively answer to this Interrogatory
eyther affirmatively or negatively being wholly Ignorant and [?not]
knowing what such shipps of warr are usually and generally
taken
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.3r Annotate
taken to be, that after haleing and comeing upp with another shipp doth
Change her colours. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 11th he saith he was not aboard the interrate shipp the Golden Starr till after
said tyme as the Wayters for the Prize office came upon her in the behalfe
of the State, and by authority of the Commissioners for the Prize Office; And he saith
that after the said Waiters were so aboard he saw the master of the Waterhound
named [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Grant take out of the Golden Starr a bag of moneyes of about
six hundred peices of 8/8, and saw the Captaine of the Water hound Giles Shelley
take out of the Golden Starr a quantity of moneyes in a Bagg, but how much
in certaine he knoweth not, and saw likewise Capt Mi[XX] Commander of the
Advantage frigott take out of the sayd Golden Starr, in one or two baggs
four hundred and three and twenty peices of eight and 1/2. And beleiveth
that severall other parcells of moneyes were taken out of the
sayd prize shipp he cannot specify, but beleiveth that all or most of
the Company of the Advantage frigot, and of the Water hound that were
aboard the Golden Starr att the tyme of seizure and afterwards before
she came into the River of Thames had and tooke some small quantityes
of the sayd moneyes, the values whereof he knoweth not. And saith that
some of the Company of the sayd Advantage and Waterhound but who in particular
he knoweth not tooke out of the Golden Starr some small Jarrs of oyle
and some other things the particulars or values whereof he cannot sett
forth. And further he cannot depose.&quot;

To the 12th Interrogatorye he saith
he is not bound to answer
as he beleiveth, there being not any false colours out on board the sayd
Advantage frigott when she haled the Golden Starr. but the Colours
allowed by this State onely.

To the .13 he saith that in case the says shipp the Morning Starr shall be
adiudged prize he this rendent expecteth benefit thereby according
to the office he bore in the Advantage frigot. and according to an Act
or Ordinance of Parliament made in that behalfe, and not otherwise. And
further he saith he cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke by Mr ?Chrymes

Marke harrison [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 26th day of September 1653.

On the behalfe of the Keepers of the Liberty)
of England by authority of parliament against)
a shipp or vessell called the Hart of Skadam)
taken and seized by some of the shippes of)
the ffleet of this Commonwealth. Budd)
of which sayd vessell the Hart Peter)
ff[?eiir] was master.)

R[XX]:t

1.

William Evarson of Skadam in holland
Mariner aged four and forty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that he this deponent was
one of the Common Mariners of the Companie of the sayd shipp the Hart
and was aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure of the same
by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth; And saith that the sayd shipp
the Hart came last from Skadam in Holland and began her outward
voyage
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.3v Annotate
voyage from shoare, and should have there ended her voyage, and so would
have done in case she had not bene hindred. And saith the master and shipps
Companie of the sayd shipp the Hart the voyage in question were and are all
of them Inhabitants of Skadam aforesayd and subiects of the States of the
united Provinces, All which he knoweth being an Inhabitant of Skadam
and one of the sayd shipp of the Harts Companie as he hath declared. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatorie This deponent saith and deposeth that the sayd ship
the Hart had att the tyme of the sayd seizure, one hundred and four score
Tonnes of pickled herrings on board her. And saith the sayd
shipp and all her sayd lading did att the sayd tyme of seizure belong to
severall merchants Inhabitants of Skadam subiects of the sayd States of the
united Provinces, The premisses he knoweth being of the sayd shipps
Companie and an Inhabitant of Skadam as aforesayd, and well knoweing
Mr Anthonie of Skadam Bookekeeper for the sayd Owners of the sayd shipp
and goods, the names of which owners in pticular he cannot sett forth.
And otherwise he cannot deppose saving that the sayd Mr Anthonie is a principall
owner of the sayd shipp and goods nemaley of one halfe part of the said shipp and goods

To the third Interrogatorie he saith he doth not know that there were any Bills
of lading Cocquetts, Charterparties or other writings aboard the sayd
vessell the Hart when she was seized, neither doth he know that since
she the sayd vessell came from the Last port any writings have bene
burnt throwne overboard or hid or concealed or altered. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

Sam DelaPlace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

the marke or firme of [XX XXXX]

William [XX HIS MARKE] Evason [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

2.

Herrick Williamson of Skadam in Holland Mariner
aged fourty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie This deponent saith he was one of the Common Mariners
of the sayd shipp the Harts Companie, and was on board her att the tyme
of seizure by the shipps of this Commonwealth, And saith the sayd shipp
the Hart began her outward voyage from Skadam in Holland, and there
was to have ended her voyage, and so would have done had she not beene
intercepted. and saith the Master of the sayd shipp Peter ffreize and all the
shipps Companie were of Skadam aforesaid and subiects of the States of the
united provinces, which he knoweth being an Inhabitant of Skadam
and one of the sayd shipps Companie as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatorie he saith and deposeth that the lading of the sayd shipp at
the tyme of seizure was one hundred and four score tunnes of pickled
herings or thereabouts. And saith that one Mr Anthonio Libertson of Skadam
is the principall Owner of the sayd shipp and lading, and as this deponent
taketh it, of one halfe part of both the sayd shipp and lading. And saith
that Jacob Symondson, and Jacob Alwinson of Skadam and others whose
names this deponent remembreth not are likewise part owners of the
sayd shipp the Heart and her lading. And otherwise he cannot depose saving
that all the Owners of the sayd shipp and lading were and are Inhabitants
of Skadam and subiects of the States of the united Provinces and so
accounted
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.4r Annotate
accounted reported and taken, the premisses this deponent knoweth to be true
being himselfe an Inhabitant of Skadam and att the tyme of the sayd seizure
and before one of the sayd shipps Companie. And otherwise cannot depose

To the third Interrogatorie negatively to every part thereof

the marke of the sayd
Hendrivk Williamson [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest
before Doctorr Godolphin and Doctor Clarke
----
The 27th of September 1653

Edward Beale and Companie against)
a certaine shipp called the Expectation and)
her tackle apparell and furniture and)
whatsoever summes of money due for the)
fraight of the same or against whatsoever)
summes of money proceeding of the sale)
of the sayd shipp tackle and furniture and)
against William Startute, John Bridsey)
[BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Williams, George Cane, [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] harding)
and others comeing in for their Interest)
and against whomsoever appearing for the[?m])
Smith Suckley)

Smith Elcock dt

Examined upon a Libell on the behalfe
of the sayd Edward Beale and
Companye.

1.

Walter Hickst of Traverion in the
County of Cornwall an Inhabitant of Messina in Scicilia merchant aged eight
and twenty yeares or thereabouts a
witness sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd Libell this deponent saith and deposeth that being
and residing in the Citty of Messena in Scicily in the yeare of our Lord 1650
and monthes therein respectively he there within that tyme saw the arlate
shipp the Expectation, and saith she continued there in the monthes of November
december January and ffebruary 1650. and further saith that att the sayd
tyme the arlate Thomas Newman was Master and Commander of the sayd
shipp and one Thomas Ayres was purser of her and so commonly accounted reputed
and taken. And further he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd Libell This deponent saith that he hath well knowne
the arlate Edward Beale for these eleven yeares now past for and
during which tyme he hath beene a merchant of good quality resident in
Messina aforesayd and further saith that the sayd shipp the Exepectation in
the sayd monthes of November december January and ffebruary 1650 and
during sayd tyme as the sayd shipp the Expectation did abide in the port of Messina
aforesayd, the sayd shipp of the sight and knowledge of this deponent did stand in need of
and did want divers repaires, in her hull tackle apparell furniture and
victualls and provisions for her Company, and the sayd Newman wanted
moneyes allso to pay the says shippes Companie their wages and other debts oweing by the says shippe and saith
the says shipp was in that tyme in so bad condition that without repaires and
moneyes to make good the sayd repaires she could not goe from thence, and somuch
the aforesayd Newman and Ayres, as themselves told this deponent att Messina,
did signify and make knowne to the sayd Edward Beale then living att
Messina. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd Libell this deponent saith that within the sayd monthes
and yeare aforesayd the sayd ship the Expectation wanting reparations and
the sayd Newman and Ayres wanting moneyes to repair the same, they the
sayd Newman and Ayres made their addresse to the sayd Edward Beale, and
he the sayd Edward Beale and Company finding and percyveing the great
want
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.4v Annotate
want of the sayd shipp Expectation was in as aforesayd did att the
request of the sayed Newman and Ayres really and truely lend unto them the
sayed Newman and Ayres for ther use and service of the sayd shipp the
Expectation, and for carrying her home to this port of London, and
for providing of victualls for her and payeing of the sayd Mariners
their wages and other debts oweing by the sayd shipp the summe of eight hundred and odd dollars or peices of 8/8
upon Bottomrie, And adventure thereof upon the keele of the sayd
shipp the Expectation from the tyme of her departure from Messina untill
the tyme of her Arrivall into the River of Thames, upon which contract
the sayd Thomas Newman and Thomas Ayres did oblige and bind the sayd
shipp tackle and furniture and fraight arising upon the same, but
saith he doth not know the certayne summe the sayd Edward Beale and
Companie were to receyve upon the sayd contract upon the arrivall of the
sayd shipp Expectation in the River of Thames. And saith that the
reason of this deponents knowledge in the premisses was and is that the
sayd Newman and Ayres did themselves declare to this deponent att
Messina within the tyme arlate the effect and substance of what he hath now
deposed touching the loane of the sayd 800 and odd dollars upon bottomry
by the sayd Edward Beale and Companie, and Paschall Russa a publick Notary in Messina
who as he sayd drew the Act of Bottomrie declared and made knowne the [?same]
likewise to this deponent within the sayd tyme, And this deponent likewise saw
about the same tyme an entry of the sayd moneyes and contract in the bookes
of the sayd Edward Beale att Messina. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith that within the monethes and yeare aforesayd, the sayd
Newman and Ayres did of the certaine knowledge and sight of this deponent amend
and repaire the sayd shipp Expectation and her tackle and apparrell and
provided victualls for her Company, all which this deponent verily beleiveth
they did with the moneyes so taken upp as aforesayd uppon Bottomry of
the sayd Edward Beale and Company, and verily beleiveth that in case
they had not beene so furnished by the sayd Edward Beale and Companye
the sayd shipp could not have gone and proceeded from Messina, and
beleiveth that the money of the sayd Beale and Company was a maine
cause and occasion and meanes which brought the sayd shipp from Messina
And so much or to the like effect the sayd Newman and Ayres have confessed
and declared to this deponent- And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith that after borrowing the sayd moneyes, and repairing the
sayd shipp in manner as aforesayd videlicet in the month of March 1650 or
about that tyme the sayd shipp sett sayle from Messina under the Conduct
of the sayd Thomas Newman and in or about July or August next ensueing
1651. arrived safely att this port of London. the premisses he knoweth to
be true for that he this deponent did Lade aboard the sayd shipp att
Messina about the sayd moneth of March about 40 tonns of goods, and saw
the sayd shipp sett sayle therewith within the sayd moneth or about that
tyme from Messina, and afterwards videlicet about the latter end of August
or beginning of September 1651 receyved letters of Advise by post
att Messina from this port of London wherein was signifyed, that the sayd
shipp
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.5r Annotate
shipp Expectation and this deponent sayd 40 tonn of goods therein were a little
before the date of that letter (which bore date in July or August 1651) safely
arrived in the River of Thames. And otherwise he cannot depose saving
he saith It is thirty dayes and upwards since the Arrivall of the sayd shipp
in the River as aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .7.th he saith he knoweth not whether the sayd shipp the Expectation
hath bene sold or noe since her Arrivall in the port of London. But saith
that in case she be sold, she did as he beleiveth yeild more moneyes by
reason of the repaires done to her at Messina by Mr Beales moneyes as
aforesayd, for that he saith before her said repaire at Messina, she was
so rotten and out of Order that she was then of little worth, and could not
possibly without repaires have sayled from Messina to London and somuch
the sayd Thomas Newman did declare himselfe to this deponent att Messina
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .8.th he saith he referreth himselfe to the Acts and proceeding had
and made in this Court. And further he cannot depose.

To the .9.th he saith he knoweth not any of the parties arlate, And further
cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true, And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interries. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first he saith he hath noe relation to the interrate Edward Beale
nor ever had, and saith he cometh to be a witnes in this cause att the
Request of Mr Elrock a merchant of this Citty. And saith that the
sayd shipp Expectation was att Messina in Scicily in November December
January and ffebruary 1650 and lay neere the mould (sic) there being a
place where the Merchants of Messina usually walke and this deponent
upon occasion of walking there with others and seeing the sayd shipp
being an English vessell there lyeing, did severall tymes goe aboard
her both before she was repaired in the tyme of her repairing and allso
after she was repaired. And otherwise he cannot depose, saving that for a
moneth and upwards after repairing the sayd shipp lay within pistoll shott of the Rendants howse

To the second he saith that in the monethes of May June July August and
September 1650 or about that tyme the sayd shipp the Expectation was
in the service of the sayd Edward Beale, and he the sayd Edward Beale
did take the same to ffreight, and saith that before he so tooke to freight
and ymployed the sayd shipp, she was his debtor for reparies and fitting
out to sea in the summe of four hundred dollars or thereabouts, and
did serve him in the sayd monethes or some of them, the certayne space
of tyme he this deponent cannot sett forth, upon a voyage from Messina
to Constantinople, for the satisfaction of the sayd debt, And otherwise he
cannot depose, saving he came to know the premisses by the relation of the sayd Newman Ayres
and the sayd Producent Edward Beale att Messina in the sayd yeare 1650.

To the third he saith he was not present att the payment of the moneyes interrate
but hath credibly heard and verily believeth that the moneyes due for the
Mariners wages of the sayd shipp was payd in peices of 8. and that the
moneyes for repair of the shipp was payd by the Order of the sayd Newman
and Ayres to severall Brokers of Messina to whom the sayd Newman and
Ayres had given direction to furnish her with said necessaries as she
wanted, and beleiveth the sayd moneyes was payd to the sayd Brokers
in [?Oun?es] [?Tarues] and graines the ordinary Currant moneyes of Messina
and otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.5v Annotate
To the .4.th he saith that Juan Dominico [?Marella], Diego Catannia, and
ffrancisco da ffran[?l] were the Brokers whom the sayd Newman and
Ayres ymployed to furnish necessaries for the sayd shipp, and the parties
to whom the moneyes for such necessaries were payd; And this deponent
saw the sayd Brokers send aboard the sayd shipps, cordage, ockham
Nayles, bolts, provisions of Victualls and other things the particulars
whereof or respective severalll summes paid for all or any of them, or the
names of the parties or persons who were present; or the occasion of them
being so present, hee cannot specify or sett forth. And otherwise cannot
depose

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin.

Walter Hickst [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 3d day of October 1653

The Keeper of the Liberty etcetera against the
Golden Starr.

Examined uppon the sayd allegation

2

Robert Mill of Deptford in the County of Kent Mariner
Captaine of the Advantage frigot, aged two and
thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as following videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that the arlate shipp
the [?Golden] Starr was chased fought with and taken upon the English coast
betweene Beachy and the Isle of Wight by the Advantage frigot whereof
this deponent was Captaine, and the Water hound whereof Giles Shelley
was Captaine both the sayd shipps being in the immediate service of this
Commonwealth, which this deponent knoweth being Captaine of the Advantage
frigott and present at the chase, fight and seizure aforesayd. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith the sayd seizure fight and chase happened as aforesayd
off of Beachy within 5 leagues or thereabouts of the English shoare upon
the 23th day of ffebruary, 1652 last past. which he knoweth for the reason
aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith in ffebruary 1652, and for many monethes
before and continually since there was and is warr betweene the Commonwealth
and the States Generall of the united Provinces, And so much was and is
publike and notorious, and was in ffebruary aforesayd and many monethes
before as he verily beleiveth and knowne and belived in Spaine and the P[XXXX GUTTER]
thereof and particularly att [?Cadiz]. and in fflanders Hamburgh, and other
ports and places beyond the seas, and well knowne as he also beleiveth to
the Master and Company of the ?Golden Starr afforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith the sayd shipp ?Golden Starr att the tyme of the chase aforesayd
was sayling in that way or course that lyeth and leadeth directly for [XX GUTTER]
Holland, whcih he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 5th he saith and deposeth that upon the 23th day of ffebruary aforesayd
and about 7 of the Clock in the morning of the same day This deponent mett with the
sayd shipp the Morning Starr, and being at a good distance and out of
shott, caused the Hollanders Jack and Ancient to be putt out upon his frigot
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.6r Annotate
The Advantage, which he so did the better to discover or what the sayd shipp
the Morning Star or Golden Starr might be, and for the same purpose
soone after shott a warning peice being still out of shott, and thereupon
the sayd shipp the Golden Starr bore toward the Advantage frigot and
fired one Gun without shott, which in the sea language is much as to
say All freinds and presently putt out a Redd Ancyent which when this deponent perceyved he immediately tooke
downe his says Holland Colours, and putt out the Colours of this Commonwealth
whereupon the sayd shipp Golden Starr stood off from the Advantage and
returned into her former course, howbeit this deponent made after the
sayd ship and being come upp with her within pistoll shott side by side
haled the sayd shipp Golden Starr, and badd them severall tymes that they
should strike for the Parliament of England, whereto the sayd Master
of the Golden Starr refused to strike, and bad this deponent kisse his breech
and sayd he would not strike to such a small shipp as the Advantage was
and immediatley fetcht out his Cutlase and waved it att this deponent bidding
him to do his worst and come under his Lee and this deponent desired him in a fair way to submitt
himselfe to be visited and to send out his boat to that purpose, and thereto the
sayd master of the Golden Starr replyed that he had noe boat to send out,
whereas in truth as afterwards appeared he had a fair good boat aboard
Hereupon this deponent percyving that entreaty would not prevayle fired a
gunn over him; and then immediatley the sayd Master of the Golden Starr hoysted out his flagg
of defiance being a Red flagg with a oicture of a hand and sword
thereon, and then againe badd this deponent doe his worst, And this deponent
againe firing another gunn over him hee immediatley fired a whole broad
side at this deponent and killed one of this deponents men; upon which
a sharp fight was begann which continued from about .8. of the Clock in
the morning till about 12 att noone betwixt the sayd shipps the Advantage
frigott wearing the Colours of this Commonwealth, and the sayd shipp the
Golden Starr wearing her redd Ancyent and flagg of defyance as aforesayd
in which fight this deponent lost two of his men, and the Golden Starr
fought sharply all the sayd tyme, and the master and Company of her
used their uttmost endeavour to sinke and destroy the sayd Advantage frigott
the premisses this deponent knoweth being actually engaged in the sayd fight
aboard the Advantage and seeing and observing the premisses to be true
as he hath now declared and otherwise cannot depose

To the nynth tenth articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that
during the sayd fight and about 12 of the Clock of the same day the arlate
shipp the Waterhound whereof Giles Shelley was Commander came
upp, And the Water hound came and engaged in the fight and shott att the
Golden Starr, and the Golden Starr made a broad side against the Waterhound
and fought with her and wounded the Boatswaine therof, and continued
the sayd fight till she was boarded and subdued by the sayd shipps the Waterhound
and Advantage. And he saith that during all the sayd fight the foresayd flagg
of defiance continued still upp at the main topmast head of the Golden Starr and
was
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.6v Annotate
was not taken downe till after the sayd shipp was subdued, and then it was taken
downe by some of the Companie of the sayd English shipps that made the seizure
and this deponent now taketh it by some of the Company of the sayd Waterhound
frigot: And saith that after the sayd shipp was taken and subdued as
aforesayd, this deponent being aboard her videlicet about halfe an howre after
the fight heard severall of the Company of the Golden Starr, say there
was a good prize for this deponent and the sayd Gyles Shelley then likewise
aboard meaning and speaking of the sayd shipp the Golden Starr. The
premisses this deponent knoweth being present att and seeing, and hearing the
severall passages aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .11. and 12. articles he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the last he saith his depositions are true. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interries. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. and .2. he saith he this Rendent was Captaine of the Advantage
frigott interrate and was abat the tyme of taking and surprizeing
the Morning Starr or Golden Starr interrte.

To the third he saith he knoweth not of any shipp knowne by the name of
the Adventure frigot any way concerned in this ?busenes and saith the Advantage frigot alone mett with and for
about four howres fought with the sayd Morning Starr or Golden Starr.

To the .4.th he saith the sayd shipp the Advantage frigot fought with
the Golden Starr aforesd.

To the 5:th he knoweth both the sayd shipps the Advantage and the
Waterhound, and saith that att the tyme of the sayd fight they were both
of them Dutch built shipps.

To the .6.th he saith he was present all the tyme of the fight interrate.

To the .7. he saith that the Advantage frigott att the tyme of shooting the
warning shott as aforesayd, being att a great distance frō the Golden
Starr, and without shott, did weare and had out the Holland or fflemish
colours in her sterne for the reasons predeposed. And otherwise negatively.

To the 8th he saith the sayd Advantage frigott did make two shotts with bulletts
over the Golden Starr as aforesayd, before the Golden Starr fired att the
Advantage.

To the .9.th he referreth himselfe to the foregoeing depositions wherein he
hath deduced the whole series of the sayd engagement and fight, and otherwise
negatively.

To the .10. he saith It is usuall and Lawfull as he beleiveth especially in tyme
of warr for shipps to weare severall colours, before fight, but to fight onely under
their owne colours, and saith that the supposition made in this Interrogatory is quite
besides the matter in debate, howbeit for satisfaction thereto he saith, that
when any shipp att sea uppon the first haling of another shipp doth weare
the colours of one Republike State or Prince, and afterwards doth putt out
att the same tyme the Colours of any other Commonwealth Prince or State
different from the first Republike Prince or State, such shipp for ought that
this deponent knoweth or hath heard is not usually and generally taken to
be a Searover or pyrate; nor that such shipp or the Company thereof
may be Justly suspected for an enemy to that shipp which is haled
And further he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.7r Annotate
To the .11th. he saith. that he this deponent was aboard the Golden Starr aforesd
after the seizure interrate, and whilest the sayd shipp lay in the Hope
tooke out of the masters mates chest in the Round howse of the sayd shipp four
hundred twenty two peices of 8/8 or thereabouts, And saith that he hath
heard that the Master of the Water hound, and the Captaine and Prickmaster
thereof had and tooke some baggs of moneyes out of the sayd shipp, but
to what value he knoweth not, but hath heard they were in all about
seven baggs. And farther he cannot depose, saving he beleiveth
all the sayd moneyes was so taken out before the unlading of the sayd
shipp by Authority of this Court, And saving that this deponent before the
sayd tyme had out of the sayd shipp from betwixt the middle deckes
thereof two small Casks of oyle the value whereof he knoweth not.

To the 12 he saith It is usuall as he beleiveth for any shipp att sea being
haled by any shipp who att the tyme of haling and commanding to strike weares false colours and
gives there by suspition of being an enemy or pyrat to stand upon she
do forgive g?uard And othewise cannot depose.

To the .13. he saith in case the sayd shipp the Morning Starr or Golden Starr
be condemned as prize, he this deponent expecteth advantage thereby
in the quality he served in the Advantage frigot, according to a law
Statute or ordinance of Parliament made in that behalfe and not otherwise.
And further he cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin

Rob: Mill [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3

Thomas Keyes of Deptford in the County of Kent Mariner
late quarter masters mate of the Advantage friggott
aged eight and forty yeares a witnesse sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first second third and fourth Articles of the sayd allegation this deponent
saith and deposeth that being aboard the sayd shipp or frigott the
Advantage in the immediat service of this Commonwealth the Captaine
and Company of the sayd shipp upon or about the 23th day of ffebruary last
past espeyed a shipp sailing in a direct Course for Holland betweene
Beachy and ffair [?lee] about four or five leagues from the English
shoare, which afterwards proved to be the arlate shipp the Golden starr
or Morning Starr whereof Michael van Lupkin was Commander, And
afterwards upon the same day and neere the same place and Coast after
a sharpe fight the sayd frigat the Advantage Commanded by Captaine
Mill and the arlate shipp the Waterhound whereof Captaine Shelley
was Commander being likewise in the ymmediate service of this Commonwealth
subdued and tooke and surprized the sayd shipp the Golden Starr. And saith
that att the tyme aforesayd and for many monthes before and since
there was open warr and hostility betweene, this Commonwealth and
the States Generall of the united provinces, And the same was and is
as
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.7v Annotate
as he saith publike and notorious and well knowne att Cadiz and
other ports of Spaine and in fflanders, and Hamburgh and other
ports and places beyond the seas, and to the Captaine and Company
of the Golden Starr as he verily beleiveth, the premisses he knoweth
being quartermasters mate of the Advantage frigot aforesayd
and present aboard her att the fight and seizure aforesayd. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth seventh and eighth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith and deposeth. that the Captaine and Company of the sayd shipp the
Advantage first espyed the sayd shipp the Golden Starr about 6 or 7 of
the Clock in the morning of the day aforesayd and toward .8. of the
Clock or some thing before came upp with the Morning Starr or
Golden Starr; having before that att a distance shott a warning
peice with powder onely to which the sayd shipp the Golden Starr
made answer in a shott of powder in token of freindshipp; And
he saith that the Advantage frigott when she so came upp with the
Golden Starr wore out the Colours of the Commonwealth onely, and the
Captaine of the Advantage then haled the Morning Starr, being
neere to her and within hearing and commanded them to strike in the
name of the Parliament of England, and submitt themselves to
be visited, and saith the Captaine of the sayd Golden Starr in stead
of showing submission to the authority of this Commonwealth being
upon the Coasts of Englands as was demanded of him and is usuall
did in a contemptuous manner returne skurrilous and base language
and in an unbecoming and skornefull and reproach full way
turned downe his breeches, and held upp his bare bumme or
breech to the sayd Captaine Mill and Company, and waved his
Cuttle axe bidding the sayd Captaine Mill Come to Leeward, all
which this deponent saw and observed. And further saith that one
Gunn being fired over the sayd shipp the Golden Starr, the sayd
Captaine whereof ?hoysed upp a flagg of defiance being a Redd
flagg with the picture of an hand and a sword therein, and immediately
fired a Broad side upon the Advantage friggot whereupon there
begann a sharpe fight betwixt the sayd shipp the Advantage
frigot wearing the Colours of this Commonwealth and the sayd shipp the
Golden Starr wearing her flagg of defiance, in which fight
two of the Company of the Advantage frigot lost their lives, and
the Master and Company of the Golden Starr with their shipp
fought eagerly and did their utmost endeavour to sinke and destroy
the sayd Advantage frigot with the English aboard her so fighting
ipon the English Coast as aforesd. The premisses this deponent
being present in the sayd fight saw and observed, and knoweth the same to
be true as he hath now declared. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the nyth and tenth he saith that during the sayd fight and about one
of the Clock in the after noone of the . same day, the arlate shipp the
Waterhound
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.8r Annotate
Waterhound wearing the Colo:rs allso of this Commonwealth came in to the
assistance of the Advantage frigot and came upp with the Golden Starr
And the M:r &amp; Company of the Golden Starr fired upon the Waterhound and
fought with her till att last the Waterhound and Advantage boarded
tooke and surprized the sayd shipp the Morning Starr or Golden Starr.
And saith the sayd shipp Golden Starr during all the sayd ffight had and
wore out her flagg of defiance which was after the fight taken
downe by some of the Waterhounds Company and not before. All which
this deponent being then present in the sayd ffight well saw and observed
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 11.th and 12th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 13th. he saith his deposotions are true.

To the Crosse Interryes. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th. he saith he was quarter Masters mate of the Advantage frigot
interrte, and aboard her att the taking of the Golden Starr or Morning
Starr interrate. And saith the Adventure frigott was not present in the chase
or fight interrate; and that the Advantage frigot alone espyed, mett with
haled and for neere four howres fought with the Morning Starr or
Golden Starr before the Waterhound interrate came in to her assistance.
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 5:th he saith he knoweth the sayd shipps the Advantage and Water
Hound, and saith they are dutch built shipps, and so were att the tyme
of the taking the sayd shipp the Golden Starr.

To the .6. he saith he was present and aboard the Advantage frigot for and
during all the fight interrate.

To the .7th. he saith that att the tyme of haling and fighting aforesayd
the sayd shipp the Advantage frigot had and were out the Colours of the
Commonwealth, and otherwise negatively.

To the .8.th he saith as he remembreth the Advantage frigot shott onely
one gunn Laden with bullet, before the Morning Starr did fire upon
the sayd Advantage frigot. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the .9.th he saith that the sayd shipp the Morning Starr or Golden Starr
during the sayd fight did hold on her Coarse, and thereby made a sh[XX]
of declining fight, but saith she refused to be visited, and made one
broad side upon the Advantage frigot before the Advantage gave
her any broadside. and otherwise negatively.

To the .10.th he saith that this Interrogatory is not as he conceyeeth pertinent
to the busines in hand. how beit for satisfaction thereto he saith that
a shipp of warr changing her colours after haling of another shipp is
not generally taken to be a pyrate, nor the sayd shipp and Company
to be an enemy to the shipp so haled; nor justly suspected so to be
as he beleiveth. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .11th. he saith he never was aboard the sayd shipp the Golden Starr or
Morning Starr. nor doth he know of any money plate or goods taken
out of the sayd shipp att any tyme by any person or persons whatsoever
And otherwise he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.8v Annotate
To the 12 he saith It is usuall for any shipp att sea being haled
by any other shipp that weares false Colours, and therby gives
suspition of being an enemy or pyrat to stand upon the [?defensive]
guard.  And otherwise cannot depose.

To .13. he saith in case the sayd shipp be condemned for prize he
expecteth benefit thereby according to the quality he served in
in the Advantage frigot and according to the Lawes and ordinances
of parliament in that case made and appoynted. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

the marke of the  '+' [MARKE] sayd Thomas Keyes [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before S:r Clarke
----
The fourth day of October 1653.

The Clayme of the Lord [?Roscea] Daniel Halfe Rider)
and others for the shipp the Saint John of which)
Jacob Great is master, and the tackle and furniture)
and other things lately seized in the same by a)
private Mann of Warr.  Suckley)

.1.

Jacob Groat of Dantzijck in Poland mariner
master of the sayd shipp the Saint John aged eight
and thirty yeares or thereabouts. a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the arlate
Lord Rossea and others all Inhabitants of Dantzyck for these 9 yeares last
past or thereabouts have bene and att present are the true and lawfull owners
of the sayd shipp the Saint John her tackle and furniture and so accounted:-
And moreover saith the sayd shipp about nine yeares since was built
att Colburne in Pomer land, and hath for the sayd nyne yeares Last
past belonged to Dantzyck, the premisses this deponent knoweth having
lived in Dantzyck for and during all the sayd tyme., and is master
of the sayd shipp  And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that on or about
the third day of October in the yeare 1652 the sayd shipp sett sayle
from Dantzyck and sayled to [?Rya] a place likewise in the East Countrye
and there tooke in a lading of hempe flax tarr Clap boards and other
like goods and in her Course for Callis whither she was bound was taken
and carryed to [?Amsterdam] by fourteene Men of Warr, and was was (sic)
there deteyned from about the beginning of December 1652 till
about the 15th day of Aprill 1653. Last past, upom pretence that she was
comeing for some port in the Commonwealth of England, And saith
that being att last released she went to Callis and there safely arrived
and delivered her ladeing, and that in her Course from [?Callis]
to Rochell there to take in a loadeing of salt was in her said Course mett
withall and taken by Captaine White a private man of warr. And
this deponent and his shipps Company did acquanint the sayd White and
Company that the sayd shipp the Saint John did belong to Dantzyck, and
shewed him his Seabreife whereby the same did and might clearly
appeare and saith that the premisses notwithstanding the sayd White
did and would bring in the shipp to Dover in or about the third day
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.9r Annotate
of September now last past and hath ever since detained the same which
he knoweth being master of the sayd shipp and aboard her during the sayd
voyage and tyme of seizure aforesaid / And otherwise cannot depose

To the third article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that soone after
the seizure of the sayd shipp the sayd White and Company did pillage and take
from this deponent eight rix dollars and three duckatts worth three pounds
three shillings sterling. And he hath credibly heard that the sayd White
and Company have allso pillaged and taken out of the sayd shipp seventeene
peices of sylver called the name of half Lewiss worth 2 shillings 6 pence a
peice sterling, and out of the Poores box seven Rix dollars worth 1 pound and 1 shilling
6 pence, and all this deponents Clothes, books, plate and sea Instraments
which were well worth thirty pounds, a new pennant worth 2 pounds
two musketts and one pistoll worth 1 pound 8 shillings, four new quiles of ropes
eight shillings, the shippes kettle worth two pounds a copper pott worth one pound
three hundred pound weight of powder worth fifteen pounds, all the
Gunnes Provisions worth three pounds, and from John Simonson one of the
Mariners of the sayd shipp three pounds nyne shillings and his Chest
and all the Companies Cloathes worth thirty pounds sterling And
otherwise he cannot depose

To the fourth article of the sayd Allegation this deponent saith that soone after the
sayd seizure the sayd White and Company did turne all the Companie
of the sayd shipp the St John on Shoare and plundered them of their Clothes
as aforesayd, saving what was on their backs, and gave them nothing
wherewith to helpe themselves nor made any provision for them. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
sayd Lord Possoe and others the Owners aftersayd were and are Inhabitants
of dantzyck and subjects of the King of Poland in Prussia and so
commonly accounted reputed and taken which he knoweth being an Inhabitant
of the same place. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1 he saith he was produced a witnes in this cause by the advise of Master
Suckly one of the Proctors of this Court, and saith he hath two and thirtyeth
part of the sayd shipp; and came first aboard her att dantzyck and hath
belonged to her 2 yeares, hath bene Master of her one yeare and upwards
and hath knowne her nyne yeares.

To the 2nd he saith that the sayd shipp hath made two voyages since he belonged
to her, and the first voyage she so made was to Opsam neere Excester in
England whither she brought a burthen or lading of hempe flax wax
Clapboard Iron Steele and other Eastland goods for the Accompt of English
merchants one of whose names was Master Pitch and from hence returned back
to Dantzyck in her ballast and saith the second voyage she made was the
voyage now in question where she took in part of her lading att dantzick
and part att Rye and was bound for Callice with the sayd goods for the 
Accompt of Master Le hays, Master Basshell, and Master de Paco merchants of Callice
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.9v Annotate
And from Callice went to Rochell in her ballast and brought back to Callice
a Lading of salt for the Accompt of Mounsieur Le Croir a merchant
of Rochell. And goeing back to Rochel in her ballast to fetch salt for
the sayd Owners account and [XXX] for Danzick was in her Course seized by Captaine White as aforesaid
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third he saith the sayd shipp came last from Callice before she was taken
and came from thence in her ballast and he knoweth of noe other moneyes
aboard her but what was pillaged as aforesaid by the sayd White and Company

To the fourth he saith the sayd White himself tooke from this deponent out of
his pocket the perspective glasses worth 10 s and a [?XXXX] worth 2 s 6 d and  3 duckatts aforesaid. And saith he knoweth
the value of the moneyes and goods plundered being a Mariner and well
versed in things of that nature and otherwise saving his foregoing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith there was sufficient provision aboard the sayd shipp
for three monthes att the tyme of the seizure and otherwise negatively

Sam [?Delafaie] [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?Jahim ?gXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the said allegations

2

Gilbert Johnson of Danzyck Mariner Carpenter of the
sayd shipp the Saint John aged five and twenty yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
arlate Lord Jossoe, Daniel Halfe Ryder, Thomas Galantime, Hans
Turan, Jochim Comeche, Jan Backer, and Jacob Groate all
Inhabitants of dantzyck were and are Owners of the sayd shipp the Saint
John her tackle and furniture and so accounted, and saith the sayd shipp
was built at Colburne in Pomerland about nyne yeares since, and
was from thence brought to Dantzyck, and ever sithence hath belonged
to the Port of datzyck videlicet from her first building which he knoweth
being an Inhabitant [of] Danzyck and Carpenter of the sayd shipp And
otherwise cannot depose

To the second he saith the sayd shipp about this tyme 12 monthes was bound from
Dantzyck to Rye and thence to Callice and tooke in her lading being hempe flax pitch
tar Clapboard and other Eastland goods part att dantzyck and part
at Rye within the [Sondt] and in her course for Callice was taken by
fourteene men of war of Holland and by them broughtor carryed to
Amsterdam where under pretence that she was bound for England the sayd
shipp was deteynedall winter and att last in the Spring last was dismissed
and came to Callice and there discharged her lading. And afterwards in
her Course from Callice to Rochell for salt was taken by Captaine White
a private Man of War And saith the sayd Jacob Groate Master of
the sayd shipp Saint John and his shipps Company did declare to the sayd
White
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.10r Annotate
White that the sayd shipp did belong to Dantzyck and shewed him their
Seabriefe whereby the same might and did appeare, but the sayd White
brought the sayd shipp into Dover about a month agoe and there still deteynes
the same, the premisses he knoweth being Carpenter of the sayd shipp and
aboard her for and during all the sayd voyage, and att the tyme of seizure.
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third he saith that soone after the seizure aforesayd the sayd Captaine
Whit and Company did pillage and take from the sayd Groote and Company
all their Cloathes bookes and Instruments and out of the masters
Chest about 17 halfe [?Lewis] peices of sylver, and fron the steersman
of the sayd shipp severall Rix dollars and halfe Lewis peices - and also
a new pennant, 2 masketts 1 pistoll 3 bar. powder severall quiles of roapes, a barrell
of butter bacon and other provisions, the shipps kettle, a Copper pott, and
severall other things this deponent being present and aboard when
the sayd shipp Saint John and her Company were pillaged and plundered
as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose, saving he knoweth not the
value of the sayd goods so pillaged.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth That
the sayd Captaine White and Company after seizure of the sayd shipp
turned all the Company thereof a shoare and allowed them noe moneyes
or other provisions for their suppor this deponent being one of the sayd
shipps Companie so turned out as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith that the sayd Lord Roscoe and Company Owners of
the sayd shipp were and are all of them Inhabitants of dantzyck and
subiects of the King of Poland and so accounted which he knoweth being
himselfe of dantzyck as aforesayd.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. he saith he cometh to be a witnes by meanes of the master
of the sayd shipp. and saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp nyne yeares
hath belonged to her about a yeare and came first aboard her att
dantzyck. and othewise negatively.

To the 2. he saith since this Rendent belonged to the sayd shipp she brought
her loading of goods as aforesayd from dantzyck and [?Ray] to Callice
and went from thence to Rochell in her ballast, and from Rochell
brought a shipps lading of salt and there unladed the same. and
in her course back to Rochel for salt being in her ballast was seized
by Captaine White as aforesayd.

To the .3. he saith the sayd shipp came last from Callis and was in her ballast
and he knoweth not of any gold sylver Jewells or precious stones in the
sayd ballast nor any money aboard the sayd shipp save what was plundered
as aforesayd.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.10v Annotate
To the 4th he saith he saw the goods aforesayd plundered and taken
away by the sayd Captaine White and his sonne and Companye
of his shipp, and the steersman, boatswaine, Cooke and shipps
boy, and 2 others of the Saint Johns Company were then aboard. And
otherwise he cannot depose saving he saith he saw Captaine White himselfe
plunder and take the sayd Jacob Groates hatt, and saw the sonne of the
sayd White plunder the sayd Groates Chest and Cabbin.

To the .5th. he saith that after the shipp Saint John came into dover piere
he this deponent saw seven of the shipps Company aboard her and they
continued aboard one afternoone and one night and saith there was
att the tyme of seizure about 4 monethes provisions aboard the sayd
shipp. And otherwise negatively./ And further cannot depose.

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

gilbert Jan[?kyn] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The fifth day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3

Caspar Walmondt of Statin in Pomerland
Mariner Gunner of the sayd shipp the Saint John
aged eight and twenty yeares a witnes sworne
and examined. saith as followeth

To the first and second Articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that
the arlate Lord Rossow daniel halfe Ryder and Companie all Inhabitants
of dantzyck were and are the lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp the
Saint John whereof Jacob Groat is master, and saith the sayd shipp hath
belonged to dantzyck about nyne yeares videlicet from her first building
which was in Pomerland, And moreover saith, that the sayd shipp
about this tyme twelve month as he hath heard tooke in her lading of hemp
flax pitch tarr and other Eastland goods att dantzyck and Rye and in
her Course to Callice was taken by some dutch men of warr and brought
into Amsterdam, where this deponent found her under Arrest or restraint
And saith about eight dayes after Easter last past the sayd shipp being
dismist sett sayle from Amsterdam and arrived safely
att Callice whither she was bound with her lading and there delivered
the same, And saith that from Callice the sayd shipp went to Rochell
and there tooke in her lading of salt and returned with the same to
Callice, and in her second course to Rochel for salt to be transported
to dantzyck was taken by the arlate Captaine White a private man of
warr and brought into dover, notwithstanding that the sayd Jacob Groat
and Company did acquaint the said White that the sayd shipp did belong
to Dantzyck and shewed him the Seabreife of the sayd shipp to that
purpose this deponent being present and aboard att the tyme of seizure And saith the sayd shipp is still detayned att dover and so
hath bene neere about four weekes. And otherwise cannot depose saving
he heard arr Amsterdam that the sayd shipp was there deteyned the last [?winter]
under pretence that she was bound for England.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.11r Annotate
To the third article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that soone
after the seizure of the sayd shipp the sayd Captaine White and Companie did pillage
and plunder the sayd shipp the Saint John, but the particulars so taken and
plundered being not aboard the shipp when the action was done he cannot
sett forth, but saith he saw the Chests and severall other things in the
possession of the Mariners of Captaine White a shoare[?s], and saw some of them
weare this deponents owne Cloathes. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith that he this deponent was kept
in the sayd Whites Mann of Warr about 5 dayes, and att his comeing to
Dover found there the rest of the Saint Johns Company, and there aswell by
themse;ves as others did understand that they had bene turned a
shoare by the sayd Whites men without any provision made or allowed
them insomuch that they had bene in danger of perishing if Mr da Ha?ze]
of dover had not deleived them. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith that the sayd Lord Rossow and all the rest of the Owners
of the sayd shipp were and are Inhabitants of dantzyck and subiects of
the King of Poland and so accounted, which he knoweth being often att
dantzyck and having often sayled in other shipps belongeing to the foresayd
Owners. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause by the order of
Jacob Groat the Master of the sayd shipp. and saith he hath belonged to the
sayd shipp neere about 6 monthes, and came aboard her first at Amsterdam
and hath knowne her from her first building att Colbergh in Pomerland.

To the second he saith he came first into the sayd shipp att Amsterdam as aforesayd
and the sayd shipp carryed her Eastland Commodityes to Callice, and when she
went first to Rochel had ballast onely and returned with salt for the
Accompt of some Inhabitants of Callice, and in her second [?rise] for Rochell
being the voyage wherein she was seized was in her ballast. And otherwise
cannot depose

To the 3d he saith the sayd shipp came last from Callice in her ballast, And
saith the Master of the Saint John had some moneyes in his Chest, but to
what value he knoweth not and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .4.th he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .5.th he saith there was provision aboard the sayd shipp at the tyme
of seizure for about three monthes, and otherwise negatively.

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Casper Wal[?modt] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

REPEATED WITH HIS PRECONTESTS)
BEFORE THE THREE jUDGES.)


HCA 13/68 f.11v Annotate
The 5th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Edward Beale and Company against the)
shipp Expectation/)
Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Abragam Hoopgood of Saint Ellens the lesse in London
merchant aged one and twenty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first second third and fourth aand fifth articles of the sayd allegation
This deponent saith that Residing att Messina in Scicily in the monethes
of december and January 1650, he then and there saw the arlate
shipp the Expectation being and abiding in the Port of Messina, and saith
that the arlate Thomas Newman was then Master of her, and the
arlate Thomas Ayres Purser of her and for and as such sthe sayd
Newman and Ayres were then and there commonly accounted reputed and
taken, And saith that of the saight and knowledge of this deponent the
sayd ship Expectation wsa in very great want of repaires in her
hull tackle and furniture, and so much in want thereof as that she
could not possobly without inevitable danger of foundring have made
any voyage to sea especially to this Port of London or other Port att a
great distance from Messina. And moreover saith there was att the
same tyme a Common fame and voyce amongst the English merchants
and others there resideing that the sayd Newman and Ayres wanted
moneyes to repair their sayd shipp, and that they had applyed themselves
to the arlate Edward Beale a merchant of Messina and Company for
releife therein, and that the sayd Edward Beale did undertake to
furnish them and did really furnish them according to their desires. And
this deponent saith that of his certaine knowledge and sight the sayd
shipp was repaired there about the same tyme by the said Newman and Ayres assisted by severall brokers
and others of Messina who bought the necessaries whereby the same was amended victualled and furnished
and was fitted and made tight and able to goe to sea. And by the
sommon voyce and report amongst the English merchants and others att
Messina aforesayd she was so repaired amended fitted and furnished
by the sayd Edward Beake or with his moneyes and by his meanes, And
so much this deponent verily beleiveth,
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth sevenenth and eighth articles of the sayd allegation he saith that
after the sayd shipp was so repaired as aforesayd she sett sayle from
Messina being bound for this Port of London, and otherwise referring
himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and to the Acts of this Court
he cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation he saith he knoweth none of the parties
arlate.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.12r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1 he saith he comes to be a witnes att the Request of Mr Elrock a merchant
of the Citty, and was severall tymes aboard the sayd shipp att Messina in
the monthes aforesayd or about that tyme, upon occasion of seeing her
and freinds aboard her being an English shipp, and the Respondent an
Englishman, and saith he hath noe manner of relation to Mr Beale aforesayd

To the 2d he saith that the sayd Edward Beale as hee credibly heard and
beleiveth did that the sayd shipp to [ffreight] in the year 1650 on a voyage
from Messina to Constantinople and back againe to Messina, and saith
the sayd voyage was in the summer tyme 1650 as he remembreth
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d he referreth himself to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
negatively.

To the 4th hereferreth himself to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise 
negatively.

Abraham Hopegood [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clarke and Godolphin
----
The sixth day of October 1653

The Keepers of the Liberty of England)
against the lading of this shippe the)
White Unicorne (whereof Claes)
Albertson was and is Master taken)
by the Successe ffrigot whereof)
Captaine Kendall was Captaine and)
against Jeronimo de Casseres)
and others Claymers of the sayd)
lading. Budd ffranklin)

Examined upon an Allegation of the behalfe of
the sayd Jeronimo de Casseres.

1.

ffrank. dt.

Claes Albertson of Stockholme in Swethland
Mariner Master of the sayd shipp the Unicorne
aged forty five years or thereabouts a witnes
sworene and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd Allegation, This deponent saith that he never
was in ffrance in all his life, and saith he never did nor doth know, nor
ever was accquainted with the person or persons to whom any of the
sayd shipp the Unicornes lading now in controversy was consigned,
to be delivered att Havre de Grace, nor did this deponent to the best of
his knowledge ever see or speake with the sayd person, or persons or any of
them, being indeed wholly and altogether ignorant of them and not knowing
these persons. And saith by vertue of his oath, that he never was told
or made accquainted by any the laders of the sayd Goods or by any
other person that the same goods, or any part thereof did or doe belong
to any ffrenchman or ffrenchmen living in Havre de Grace Roane
or any other parte of ffrance whatsoever. And further he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth, That
he this deponent for his parte did never see or heare of any order or direction
to be given by any ffrenchman, or ffrenchmen, eyther for the buying
providing, or ladeing of any of the goods laden aboard the sayd
shipp now in question. And saith he de never know see or hear of any
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.12v Annotate
any money to be payd, or that was payd by any ffrenchman for the same
or any part thereof, neyther did he ever heare of any promise made 
by any ffrenchman, for payment of any money for the same, or any
part thereof. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third Article of that sayd allegation, This deponent saith that att the sayd
shipps lading now in question was laden and putt on board the sayd shipp
the Unicorne att Lisbone in the monthes of December 1652 and
January 1653 new stile or stile used in Portugall, which this deponent
well knoweth being master of the sayd shipp, and -
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth Article of the sayd allegation, this deponent saith and deposeth -
that the sayd goods were all laden att Lisbone as aforesayd And saith -
he never saw to the best of his knowledge any, person or persones lade
carry or bring and putt aboard the sayd shipp the Unicorne any of the goods in question or [?deal] with
this deponent, or any other touching the same, but the persons hereafter
mentioned onely, that is to say, Hjeronimo de Casseres arlate, a servant
of the sayd Hjeronimoes whose name he remembreth not, and one [?Nicodemez]
a Broaker, and two Passengers that came along in the sayd shipp this voyage from Lisbone videlicet John Estaye and Lucas Alvarez
and saith that the sayd Hjeronimo de Casseres, and his sayd servant and
Lucas Alvarez aforesayd are by common repute Portuguesee and Inhabitants
of Portugall, And the sayd [?Nicodemez] the Broker is by common repute
a Brabander and an Inhabitant of Lisbone, and the sayd John Estaye
is an Inhabitant of Lisbone, but what countryman he is this deponent -
knoweth not; And saith all the sayd persons are by common repute subiects
of the King of Portugall : And further saith that the sayd Casseres -
his servant and [?Nicodemez] the Broker did carry or putt aboard all - 
the merchants goods now in question; saith goods onely excepted; and were [?there]
laden and are claymed in this Court by the aforesayd Passengers John Estaye - 
and Lucas Alvarez. And further saith that this deponent and his shipps
Company being most of them Easterlings did likewise lade and putt aboard
the sayd shipp the tyme and place aforesayd severall goods for their owner
Accompt videlicet ten chests of sugar and about thirty thousand oranges and lemmons
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

See his deposition to the Crosse Interrogatory. lib. 'NN.'

Repeated before the judges in Court.

Claes Albertson [SIGNED RH SIDE]
----
The twelfth day of October1653

The Keepers of the Liberty et cetera against the)
Golden Starr or Morning Starr)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

4.

Martin Bond of Shadwell in the County of Middlesex
mariner masters mate of the Advantage frigot - 
aged two and thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that the arlate shipp the Golden Starr or Morning Starr was upon
or about the 23th day of ffebruary last past taken and seized in
fight.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.13r Annotate
fight by the arlate shipps the Advantage and Waterhound being in
the immediat service of this Commonwealth upon the Coast of England
off of beachy some 2 or 3 leagues or thereabouts from the English
shoare, and was in the chase and fight sayling directly up the
English Channelle Eastward, And otherwise cannot depose saving
that it is notorious that in the sayd month of ffebruary and tyme of the
sayd [?surprizall] and for many monthes before there was and is open
warr and hostility betwixt this Commonwealth and the States of the united
provinces and beleiveth the same was well knowne and taken notice
of in Cadiz and [?other] the ports of Spaine and in fflanders and the
ports thereof and in other ports and places beyond the seas, and to
the Master and Company of the Golden Starr:

To the fifth sixth seventh and eighth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith and deposeth that the Master and Company of the sayd shipp the
Advantage about seven of the clock in the morning of the sayd 23th
day of ffebruary sayling to the westward with [?afterly] wind espyed
att a great distance a shipp sayling with a good gale to the Eastward
which afterwards proved to be the arlate shipp the Golden Starr, and
finding that the sayd ship did [?weather] the Advantage, and desiring
to know what she might be to this intent to make a discovery putt
out the Holland Colours upon the Advantage, and thereupon finding
that the sayd shipp Golden Starr bore [?upp] toward the Advantage and
being come within shott the sayd Holland colours were taken downe and
the colours of this Commonwealth putt out upon the sayd shipp or frigot
the Advantage being about the distance of halfe a mile from the
Golden Starr, and the sayd Colours of this Commonwealth being so putt
out a gun was immediately discharged to demaand the usuall and
accustomed homage due to the shipps of this Commonwealth, but there
was noe respect shewed thereto by the sayd Golden Starr, but whereas
she had before borne up to the Holland colours, as soon as the English colours
were displayed she stood off to her former course whereupon the Advantage
frigot made towards her and betwixt eight and nyme of the Clock of the
same day came upp with her and haled her and required her to submitt
her selfe to be visited as she ought to doe, and to strike to the Parliament
of England and to send their boat aboard the Advantage but answer was returned that they had noe boat in the
Golden Starr to send as the Captaine of the Advantage desired; and young
Captaine Mills Commander of the Advantage againe commanded them to strike
and bring their fore sayles to the mast that they might be visited, but
the Captaine and Company of the Golden Starr refused so to doe, and the
sayd Captaine took his Cuttleaxe and waved it over his head and bad
the sayd Mills come under his Lee thereby intimating that he would not
strike but rather fight it out, which things being passed as aforesayd
Captaine Mills commanded a gunn to be fired which was done accordingly but
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.13v Annotate
but did noe execution upon the Golden Starr so farr as this deponent [?XX]
howbeit he saith the Captaine and Company of the sayd Godlen Starr
ymediately [?pownd] a whole broad side into and upon the Advantage
whereby two of her Company were mortally wounded and after dyed
upon this a sharpe fight began broadside to broadside till after
12 of the Clock in and during which fight a Red flagg of [?defiance]
was hanged and putt out upon the mainmast toppp of the sayd Golden
Starr which being upon the English Coast and in presence of an English
frigott was an unusuall insolence against the Commonwealth, and saith
that the sayd shipp Golden Starr fought with the Advantage frigot for
three or four howres upon the English Coast in an hostile way and
used her utmost endeavour to sinke and destroy the Advantage, the premisses
this deponent knoweth to be true being present and aboard the Advantage
in the sayd fight and seeing and observing the severall passages
so had and  done as he hath now declared. And further hee cannot
depose.

To the nynth and tenth articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in the afternoon
of the same day some English shipps wearing the Colors of this
Commonwealth came in to the assistance of the Advantage, and the arlate
shipp the Waterhound commanded by Captaine Shelley came upp with
the Golden Starr and having made one broad side ymmediately boarded
her, and the Golden Starr even upon the boarding fired some gunns
upon the Waterhound, and saith the foresayd Red flagg or flagg
of defiance continued still upp upon the mainmast head of the Golden
Starr and was not taken downe till after boarding as aforesaid when it
was taken downe by one of the Waterhounds Companie, which he
knoweth being present and seeing and well observing the premisses
And otherwise cannot depose saving that the sayd Master or Captaine
and Company of the Golden Starr might well see and perseyve
that the said shipp the Waterhound and other shipps wearing the
English Colors as aforesaid did belong to this Commonwealth and were
in the immediat service thereof.

To the 11th. and 12th articles he saith he cannot depose

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. he saith there was not any shipp knowne by the name
of the Adventure engaged or any way concerned in this busines
And saith he was masters mate of the Advantage frigot interrate
and was present att the taking of the Golden Starr, and for and
during all the chase, tyme of haling and fight, and knoweth that
the sayd Advantage frigot first chased haled and fought with
the sayd Golden Starr in manner aforesayd. and further cannot depose

To the 5. he saith he knoweth both the sayd shipps the Advantage and
Waterhound and saith they are dutch built shipps both of them, and
so were the tyme of the taking the sayd shipp Morning Starr
or Golden Starr

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.14r Annotate
To the 6. and 7. he saith he was present att and in all the sayd fight 
from the begining to the end thereof, and saith that he knoweth that
the advantage frigott haled shott att and fought with the Morning 
Starr or Golden Starr under the English colors onely and noe other
and saith he hath heart that the Captaine and company of the sayd
Golden Starr have reported and given out that the Advantage
haled and fought under the dutch and ffrench colors, wherein he saith
they have reported an untruth if so it be that they have so reported.
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 8 he saith the Advantage frigot fired two or three gunns att the Golden
Star before the Golden Starr fired any, that is to say one or 2 att a great
distance to demand the usuall homage, and one being come upp with
her to bring her foresayle to the mast that she might submitt to a visit
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9. he saith the sayd shipp the Golden Starr or Morning Starr gave
and made the first broad side against the Advantage and otherwise
negatively.

To the 10th he saith he doth believe that it is usuall to accompt such 
shipp for a Searover or pyrate as after haling another shipp under
the colours of one State, doth change her colars and use the Colours of 
another state different from the first, and that such shipp and the Company
thereof may being by suspected for an enemy to the sayd shipp so
haled. But saith tht the Advantage did hale shoot and fight 
under the English colours onely, and changed their said Holland colors att least
halfe an houre before they haled the Golden Starr; and further
saith for a shipp of warr att distance to weare false colours 
to bring another shipp to Leewardwith intent to speake with and visit
her, as the Advantage did was not nor is not an argament of Pyracy
but was and is an usuall Stratagem and policy of warr, and very
necessary and lawful as he beleiveth and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 11th he saith that he this Rendent and severall of both the sayd shipps
Companies the Advantage and Waterhound were aboard the Golden Starr
or Morning Starr after the taking thereof. And saith that the Clerke
of the Checque belonging to the Waterhound did take out some plate
and sylver out of the Morning Starr before the sayd shipp was brought
into this River, but the quantity thereof he knoweth not. And saith
he this Rendent did not take out of the sayd shipp any money plate
sylver or goods. And otherwise he cannot depose saving he saith
that severall quantityes of small things above dock being accounted
usuall and lawfall plunder were likewise taken away out of the sayd
shipp before she came into this River by some of the company of the Advantage
and Waterhound, but who tooke the same in particular or to what quantity their
in kind or value this Rendent cannot sett forth. 

To the 12.th he saith he beleiveth it is usuall for any shipp being haled
by another shipp wearing false colors to stand upon the defensive guard
but saith that the Advantage did hale with her owne true Colours videlicet
the Colours of this Commonwealth and otherwise cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.14v Annotate
To the 13 he saith that in case the sayd ship the Morning Star or Golden Starr
shall be adiudged prize he doth expect such benefit and advantage
thereby as by the Lawes and usages of the Commonwealth is [?occasioned]
to be allowed in such case to one serving in the same quality as this
Respondent did in the Advantage. And further advantage expects not and
otherwise he cannot depose. 

Martin [?Band] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The Same day. examined upon the sayd allegation. [CENTRE HEADING]

5.

Francis Pleasure of Rosemary Lane in 
London Mariner aged four and twenty yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
Goldon Starr or Morning Starr and her lading were taken in fight by
the Advantage frigot and Waterhound arlate upon the English Coast
which he knoweth being one of the Company of the Advantage and otherwise
saving his subsequent depositions cannot depose.

To the second he saith the sayd ship and lading were so taken on or about
the 23th day of ffebruary 1652 last past off of Beachy about two leagues
from the English shoare which he knoweth being present att the sayd seizure
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation he saith that att the tyme of the sayd
seizure and for many monthes before and since there was and is 
open warr and hoslity betweene this Commonwealth and the States of the
United Provinces and their subiects, and the same was notorious and
well knowne as he believeth att Cadiz and other places in Spaine and 
in fflanders and other parts beyond the seas and to the Captaine
and Companie of the Golden Star. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the fourth he saith the sayd shipp the tyme aforesayd steared her
Course upp the English Channell Eastward. and otherwise cannot
depose

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd Golden Starr
being under sayle upon the English shoare as aforesayd was haled or
called unto by the Advant
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.15r Annotate
[TWO LINES OF TEXT, BOTH CROSSED OUT]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.15v Annotate
[BLANK PAGE IN ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.16r Annotate
The 13th day of October 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

6.

George Moulin of Shadwell in the County of Middlesex Mariner
Carpenters mate of the Advantage frigat aged two and thirty
yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first second third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation. This deponent saith
and deposeth that upon the munday next after the Portland fight this
last winter the tyme otherwise he remembreth not, the arlate shipps the
Advantage and the Waterhound tooke the arlate shipp the Golden Starr or
Morning Starr in fight off of Beachy about 4 leagues from the English
shoare, the sayd shipp sayling then in her direct course upp the English
Channell Eastward, and saith that att the sayd tyme and for many
monethes before and continually since there was and is warr betwixt this
Commonwealth and the States of the united Provinces, and the same was and is
notorious, and knowne as he beleiveth att Cadiz and other ports of Spaine and
in fflanders and other places beyond the seas, and to the master and Company
of the Golden Starr. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth and severnth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that upon the sayd Munday morning the arlate shipp the Advantage
being in the immediate service of this Commonwealth and wearing the Colours
thereof c ame upp with the Golden Starrupon the English coast and haled
her, and commannded her to strike to the Parliament of England and to
bring their fore sayle to the mast, and send of their boat and submitt to be
visited, but he saith the Master and Company of the Golden Starr refused
so to doe and kept on their way, whereof the Captaine of the Advantage
takeing notice with intent to mynd them of their duty made a shott att the
which notwithstanding the master and Company of the
Golden Starr not onely refused to strike and bring their sayle to the mast
but peremptorily and violently assaulted the Advantage frigat in an insolent
and hostile way upon the Coast of England, and shott a whole broad suide
upon the Advantage which did [?execution] upon the Advantage and kill'd
two of the Company thereof, and made the sayd broad side before the Advantage
made any broadside upon the Golden Starr. And afterwards fought with
the Advantage frigot 3 or 4 houres and did their utmost endeavour to sinke
and destroy her being an English frigot fighting under the colours
of England for the Commonwealth of England upon the English Coast as
aforesayd. The premisses he knoweth being present in the sayd fight in
the Advantage frigot and seeing, observing and perfectly remembring
the passages aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the Master and Company of the Golden Starr
after they were haled as aforesayd and had began the fight by a broad side
as aforesayd, putt out a Redd flagg with the picture of an hand and sword
therein
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.16v Annotate
therein att the main mast head of the Golden Starr, which they so did as this
deponent beleiveth in defiance of the shipps of this Commonwealth which
he is the rather induced to beleive for that the master of the Golden
Starr after he was summoned to be visited in the name of the Parliament
of England by the Captaine of the Advantage did not onely wave his
Cuttlace over his head bidding the Advantage come under his lee, but
after one gunn with shott had bene made by the advantage to bring her
foresayle to the mast, in a most insolent and base unseemly manner and
by way of defiance of this Commonwealths frigott turned downe his breeches
and held upp his naked bumme or breech at Captaine Milly Commander
of the sayd Advantage frigot all which this deponent saw and observed
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the nynth he saith that during the sayd fight betweene the Advantage
frigot and Morning Starr or Golden Starr the arlate shipp the Waterhound
and another frigot of this Commonweath, and both wearing the Colours thereof
came upp in aide of the Advantage. And the Master and Company of the Golden
Starr might well perceyve that the sayd shipp the Waterhound and the
other frigot were in the immediate service of this Commonwealth and otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after the sayd
shipp the Waterhound came upp with the Golden Starr, she [presently] after 
the making of 2 or 3 shotts boarded and tooke the Golden Starr, but 
that the Golden Starr made any shot att the Waterhound he cannot
he saith depose. And further saith that the foresayde flagg of defiance
was and continued still att the main mast head of the Golden Starr till
was taken downed by some of the Company of the Waterhound, or Advantage
which this deponent well observed and saw. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the eleventh and 12th article he saith he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.
----
To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6 Interrorgatories he saith and deposeth that there was not
any shipp any way concerned in the business called the Adventure and 
saith that the Advantage att the tyme of the fight interrate was a fflandrian
built ship, and the Waterhound att the same tyme a Holland built shipp
and that he this Respondent was Carpenters mate of the Advantage and was [?XXX]
all the sayd fight from the beginning to the end thereof and thereby
knoweth that the Advantage frigot first chased haled and fought with
the Golden Starr neere foure howres before the Waterhound came upp.
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 7th negatively to every part thereof.

To the 8th he saith that as he remembereth there was one shott with [?XXXXX]
and noe more made by the Advantage frigott against the Golden Starr
before the Golden Starr fired their whole broad side as aforesaid and
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .9. negatively to every part thereof.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.17r Annotate
NN

To the tenth he saith he cannot answer to this Interrogatory eyther 
affirmatively or negatively as this thereby required, for that he is 
wholly ignorant what the common opinion of mariners is in the case
putt and suggested in this Interrogatory. and saith he never heard that
case argued amongst Seamen and knoweth it is not the case or matter
of fact now in question. 

To the eleventh he saith he was aboard the Golden Starr after she came 
into the Hope and not before, and tooke out of her a small whipsaw of 
the value of 2 s or thereabouts and nothing else. and saith severall
of the Companies of the Waterhound and Advantage were aboard the 
Golden Starr before she came into the River and afterwards, and he doth
beleive that severall things were by then taken out of her but by
whom in particular, what things in particular, or to what value he saith
he cannot depose. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the twelfth he saith it is usuall for any shipp att sea being haled by
another shipp who weares false colours and thereby gives suspition of being
an enemy or pirat to stand upon the defensive guard. but the sayd shipp
Advantage did not weare any false colour when she haled the Golden Starr
as aforesayd but the English colours onely.

To the thirteenth he saith if the sayd shipp Morning Starr prove prize he
expecteth a share as Carpenters mate of the Advantage frigot according 
to the Lawes and provisions made in that behalfe, and not otherwise. and 
further he cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Godolphin)
and Doctor Clarke)

the marke of 
George 'C' Moulin [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The seventeenth day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Ren dt

6

William Taylor of Nightingale Lane in London 
Mariner one of the Company of the Advantage frigot
aged one and twenty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first second third and fourth article of the sayd allegation this deponent
saith that the arlate shipp the Advantage Captaine Mills Commander and
the Waterhound Gyles Shelley Captaine in the month of ffebruary 1652
about 3 or 4 days after Portland fight did take and surprize a certayne
shipp called the Morning Starr having a golden starr in her sterne
being the shipp Golden Starr arlate, upon the English Coast off of Beachy
about four leagues from the English shoare, And saith the Advantage
and Waterhound were att that tyme in the immediat service of this Commonwealth
and the Golden Starr did then steere her direct course for Holland and 
that at that tyme for many monethes before there was publique [?XXXXXXX] betweene this Commonwealth
and the States of the United Provinces, and beleiveth the same was well 
knowne
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.17v Annotate
knowne in Cadiz and other parts of Spayne and in fflanders and other
parte beyond the seas, and to the Master and Company of the Golden Starr
And otherwise cannot depose saving that there still is warr betweene
England and Holland and that he knoweth the premisses bring one of the
Company of the Advantage and present att the seizure of the sayd shipp the
Golden Starr.

To the fifth sixth seventh and eighth articles of the sayd allegation this deponent 
saith and deposeth that the shipp the Advantage being in her course sailing
from Dover Road to Porthmouth espyed a shipp making her course to the
Eastward or East and by South being the course for Holland, which shipp 
afterwards proved to be the Golden Starr arlate, which having this
Weather gage of the Advantage Captaine Mills caused his Holland
[Ancyent] to be putt out upon the Advantage thereby to cause the Golden
Starr to beare upp to him and withall shott off a gunn, and the sayd
shipp Golden Starr immediately did beare upp to the Advantage according
to expectation, And further saith that the sayd Captaine Mills after his shipp 
was some within shott videlicet about a quarter of a mile from the 
Golden Starr tooke downe his Holland [Ancyent] and putt out the 
English Colours and Parliament Jack and made a shott att the Golden 
Starr to make her strike, which she did not but putt out a Red flagg
with the picture of an hand and sword therein and stood off from the Advantage
and shaped her former Course, whereupon the Advantage followed
after and being some upp with her haled her and bade her strike in 
the name of the Parliament of England and hoyst out their boat that
she might be visited, but the master and Company of the Golden Starr did not onely refuse
so to doe by saying they had noe boat whereas it afterwards appeared
they had a good one aboard but allso demeanded themselves very
insolently against the Parliament and their frigot upon the English coast; the Master of the Golden Starr
clapping his hand upon his breech, and waving his Cutlace over
his head, and upon Captaine Mills firing att him agayne to make
him submitt to be visited according to reason and custome, firing upon
the sayd shipp the Advantage then wearing the Parliaments Colours and 
fought with her for the space of three of four howres and killed
some of her Company, and the sayd Master and Company did their
utmost endeavour with their shipp Golden Starr to sink and destroy
the foresayd shipp the Advantage, and the English aboard her All
which this deponent knoweth being present in the sayd fight and seeing and
well observing the premisses. And otherwise he cannot depose. 

To the 9 and 10th articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that during
the sayd fight the arlate shipp the Waterhound and another shipp in the service
of this Commonwealth both wearing the Colours of this Commonwealth came upp
to the Assistance of the Advantage, and the sayd shipp Waterhound fell in with
the Golden Starr and fought with her, and the Golden Starr made severall
shotts att the Waterhound and fought with her, till she was boarded [?suddenly]
and taken by the sayd Waterhound, And saith that the foresayd red flag
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.18r Annotate
being a flag of defiance ws and remayned tt the main top mast head of
the Golden Starr untaken downe will she was subdued and then the same was take
downe by some of the English other of the Waterhound or Advantage that
made the seizure, which this deponent being present well saw and of[?] [?]
And otherwise he cannot depose saving that the Company of the Golden Starr
might well see and propose[?] that the sayd shipp the Waterhound and the
other shipp that came into the assistance of the Advantage as aforesaid
were shipps of warr in the immediate service of this Commonwealth as
this deponent beleiveth.

To the 11th and 12th he sith he knoweth nothing thereof 

To the last he saith his deposition are true. 

To the Cross Interrogatories

To the 1.2.3.4.5 and 6. Interrogatories he saith there  was not any other shipp 
or shipps engaged in takign the Golden Starr but the Advantage and Waterhound
aforesayd onely. And saith that the sayd shipps Advantage or Waterhound
were att the tyme of the fight [?] of an Holland or fflemish [?]
and building. And saith that he this Rendent was one of the Advantages or her
Company and was present aboard her from the beginning to the end of this
sayd fight and was present att the tyme of seizure and thereby knoweth that
the Advantage frigot chased saled and fought with the Golden Starr 
neere four houres before the Waterhound came into her Assistance 
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 7. Interrogatory he saith that the sayd shipp the Advantage att the tyme 
she shott towards the Golden Starr to cause her to beare up to the Advantage
being then att a great distance and out of shott, did weare out the holland
Colors but saith that the sayd shipp Advantage att the tyme of haling, first
shooting att and fighting with the Golden Starr did weare the English
Colors or Colors of this Comonwealth onely. and otherwise negtively. 

To the 8 nd 9th Interrogatories he saith and deposeth that the sayd shipp the Golden
Star after she [?] that the Advantage was an English man of [war?]
did endeavor to [?] her by keeping on her Course for Holland; And
saith that the fight began in this manner [?] the Advantage first
fired one Gun with bullett att the Morning Starr and she returned
another shott with a bullett att the Advantage, and after a bullett or two more
mutually exchanged the sayd shipp the Advantage fired a broad side again[st]
the Golden Star, and the Golden Starr forth [?] fired a broad side against 
the Advantage, and so the fight proceeded at broadside to broadside[?] till the
Waterhound came in to the Assistance of the Advantage as aforesaid. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 10th Interrogatory he saith that a shipp fighting under  false colors is 
[?] [?] [?] a pyrate or searover[?], but so is not a shipp that hates[?]
another under one Port or kind of Colors and afterwards puts out new 
and different colors and[?] colors if any Republiq Prince or State different 
from the colors of the first republique Prince or State, but saith the practice as
now [?] a [?] on fhlagen of war, hounded he saith the Advantage
did weare onely the English Colors when she first haled the Golden
Star as aforesaid. And otherwise he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.18v Annotate
To the 11th Interrogatorie hee saith he was aboard the sayd shipp the Golden
Starr before she came into the River of Thames and after likewise
and saith hee Repondent had not nor hath not nor did take out of the sayd shipp any
money plate or any other goods whatsoever and he saith severall of the
Companies of the Waterhound and Advantage were aboard the sayd shipp
and severall goods were taken out of the Golden Starr before
she came into the sayd River of Thames but to what value or what goods
in particular, or by whome they were so taken out he knoweth not. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 12th he saith he doth not know whether it be an usuall thing
for any shipp att sea being haled by any shipp who weares false
Colours and gives thereby suspicion of being an Enemy or
Pirat to stand upon the defensive guard. And otherwise he cannot
depose

To the 13 he saith that in case the sayd shipp the Golden Starr be adiudged
prise he expecteth benefit as a privat Mariner of the Advantage
frigat according to the Act of Parliament made concerning that
affaire, and not otherwise. And further he cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Mr Cock

William Taylor [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 19th day of October
1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Thomas Jefferyes of Plymouth in the County of devon
Mariner one of the Company of the Advantage
frigott aged four and twenty yeares or thereabouts
a witness sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the articulate shipp the Golden Starr otherwise called the Morning
Starr and her lading was taken and surprized by certain shipps in
the immediate service of the this Commonwealth on the English Seas upon
the Coast of England. And saith she was first chased and haled
by the sayd Advantage frigot whereof Captaine Mills was Commander
and afterwards subdued and taken by the sayd shipp and another shipp
together with some other shipps then likewise in sight was in the immediate
of the Advantage frigot and present at the sayd seizure. And otherwise
cannot depose

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp the
Golden Starr with her lading was taken and surprized by the shipps aforesayd
towards the latter end of the moneth of ffebruary 1652 some few days after the
Portland fight the tyme otherwise he remembereth not, off of the English
Shoare some four leagues as he guesseth and to the Westward of Beachy
place which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.19r Annotate
To the thyrd article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that att the tyme of the sayd
seizure and for severall monethes before and since there was and is open
war betwixt this Commonwealth and the State of the united Provinces. And 
the same was and is Notorious, and as he beleiveth well knowne att Cadiz in
Spayne and in fflanders and att Hamburgh and other places beyond the seas, and
beleiveth the master and Company of the Golden Starr could not probably be ignorant
thereof, and soemuch this deponent heard one of the Company of the Golden
Starr  say videlicet that they had notice and well knew that there was warr betwixt
England and Holland. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the Golden Starr for
and during the tyme she was chased haled and fought by the Advantage
frigott was sayling in her direct Course upp the English Channell Eastward
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the said allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp the 
Golden Starr  being upon the English Seas neere the English shoare and
sayling Eastward as aforesayd was haled by the Captain of the Advantage
frigot  in the immediat service of this Commonwealth and wearing the Colors
of this Commonwealth. And the sayd Captaine of the Advantage required the Master
and Company of the Golden Starr in the name of the Parliament of England
to submitt themselves to be visited and to send off their shipps boat for
that purpose, being an usuall and accumstomed acknowledgement due upon those
Seas especially in tymes of warr to all shipps of this Commonwealth that
are for the defence thereof sett forth to sea, and imployed by the Supreme
Authority of this Nation. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
Commander and Company of the said Advantage frigott before they made
any shott into or against the Golden Starr first shott one warning [?peite]
eyther over or by the Golden Starr (and not att or into her) onely to give
notice to her to stay, And saith that when they in the Advantage frigot  came 
so neere to the  Golden Starr  as that they could hale them and call unto them
and att the tyme when they of the  Advantage frigott did first hale the
Master and Company of the  Golden Starr, and before they shott att or at(?)
or made any broadside against the Golden Starr, the sayd Advantage frigot 
had upp aand did weare the Colors of this Commonwealth so that they of the
Company of the Golden Starr and Master thereof might well see and perceyve
that the sayd Advantage frigot and Captaine and Company aboard her were then
in the immediat service of this Commnwealth, The premisses This deponent
knoweth being one or the Company of the Advantage frigott and present and
aboard her for and during the tyme of of the chaseing and haling and shooting 
above mentioned. And otherwise cannot depose

To the seveneth article of the saith and deposeth that the
Captaine or Master and Company of the Golden Starr notwithstanding the premisses 
did not nor would not strike to the sayd Commonwealths frigott, nor submitt themselves 
to be visited nor send out their boat as they were required to doe but denyed
that they had any boat aboard whereas they had then as afterwards appeared
a good and sufficient boat, which the Captaine and Company of the  Advantage 
did after the seizure make use of. And saith the sayd Captaine or Master of the 
Golden Starr  did not onely refuse to be visited but carryed himselfe very insolentlly 
towards this Authority of this Commonwealth in that when he was haled by the 
sayd Advantage frigott wearing the Colors of this Commonwealth in the name of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.19v Annotate
of the Parliament he waved his Cutlace over his head bidding the
Advantage to Come under his Lee, and in token of Scorne clapt his hand upon
his buttock or breech, and gave order to fire upon the Advantage
which was accordingly done and the sayd Captaine and Company of
the Golden Starr in a violent and hostile manner, and to make good their
former insolencyes fought with the Advantage frigott and the
Captaine and Company thereof as an enemy and continued fight
with them upon the sayd English Seas neere the English Shoare as
aforesayd for the Space of three or four howres and killed some and
wounded others of the Company of the Advantage and endeavoured
to the uttermost of their power with their shipp The Golden Starr being
an able shipp and well armed to Sinke and destroy the sayd Advantage
frigott and the Captaine and Company fighting aboard her The premises
he this deponent saw and well observed being present in the sayd
fight and otherwise cannot depose

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
Master and Company of the Golden Starr after they were haled as
aforesayd caused a Redd flagg with the picture of an hand and sword
therein to be putt ont att the Main top mast head of the Golden Starr which
they so did as this deponent did then and still doth conceyve in defiance
of the sayd Advantage frigott a ship in the immediat service of this
Commonwealth as aforesaid. the premises this deponent saw and observed
and further cannot depose.

To the nineth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that during the sayd
fight the articulate shipp the Waterhound being in the immediat service of this
Commonwealth and some other shipps in the same service all wearing the
Colours of this Commonwealth and might be well discerned and perceyved by
the Captaine or master and the Company of the Golden Starr to be in the immediat
service of this Commonwealth as men of war for the defence
thereof came in to the assistance of the Advantage frigot. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the Waterhound
immediately as she came upp with the Golden Starr boarded
her. And they in the Morning Starr or Golden Starr never tooke downe
their foresaid Red flagg of defiance, but she same continued still upp
att the Maintopmast head of the Golden Starr, till the same was taken
downe by some of the Company of the Advantage or Waterhound that
subdued and took the Golden Starr, the premises this deponent knoweth
being then present aboard the Advantage frigot and further cannot
depose.

To the eleventh and twelth articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith
he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true

To the Cross Interrogatories

To the 1 he saith he was aboard the Advantage frigot and present att the
seizure of the Golden Starr or Morning Starr, and was one of the Company of
the said Advantage frigot.

To the 2 he saith he was present att the takeing of the Golden Starr.

To the 5 hee saith he doth certainly know that the sayd Advantage frigott
did first chase and hale the Morning Starr or Golden Starr in [XXX]

To the 4th he saith he knoweth that the Advantage frigot did first
fight with the Golden Starr before the Waterhound or any other shipps
came in.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.20r Annotate
To the .5. he saith that the Advantage and the Waterhound interrate att the tyme
of the seizure interrate were both of them of this deponents knowledge dutch
built shipps. and otherwise cannot depose

To the .6. he saith he was present in and att the fight interrate.

To the .7. he saith that the sayd shipp Advantage did shoot one gunn att
random and out of shott as he taketh it, toward the Golden Starr, and the sayd
Advantage frigott then had out the Holland Ancyent in her sterne and
otherwise negatively.

To the eighth Interrogatorie he saith the sayd shipp the Advantage did shoot off
about three peices of ordinance with bulletts before the sayd
shipp the Golden Starr or Morning Starr did fire any gunnes att the 
Advantage.

To the nynth Interrogatorie he saith he cannot positively depose which
of the sayd two shipps the Advantage or the Morning Starr made the
first Broad side, nor doth know that the Golden Starr did avoyd or decline
fighting, but did rather stirr up and provoke the Advantage frigott
to fight as he hath predeposed. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the tenth Interrogatorie this rendent saith that a shipp that halleth another shipp
under false colours or changes her colours after haling is by common 
reputation a sea rover or Pyrat or so accounted to be, and an enemy
to the shipp so haled. but he saith that the Advantage frigott att the first
haling of the Golden Starr did weare her owne true English
Colours as aforesayd and did not change them att all after such haling
but wore and had them out onely during the whole fight. And otherwise
he cannot depose saving that it is now growne a common stratagem of
warr to salute another shipp by shooting of a Gunn att distance
under false colours, and is not nor ought to be as he conceyveth a
budge or token of pyracye.

To the 11th Interrogatorie This deponent saith he was aboard the interrate shipp
the Golden Starr or Morning Starr before she came into the River of Thames
and not after. and saith that severall of the Company of the Advantage
and Waterhound were likewise on board the sayd shipp Golden Starr, And
saith he this deponent and others of the Company of the Advantage did gett
some plunder or Clothes, olives, oranges lemmons and Jarrs of oyle
and other things from betwixt the deckes of the Golden Starr being by
common esteemme and repute among seamen lawfull prize and plunder,
all or most whereof was taken from them by Mr Harrison the master
of the Advantage frigott who pretended he would share it equally and
thereupon caused the same to be putt into the great Cabin of the Advantage
but what became thereof afterwards this deponent knoweth not but saith
that he this Rendent for his part never had any part or share thereof, nor
of any plate sylver moneyes or goods whatsoever, aboard the sayd
shipp the Golden Starr, And further he saith he cannot depose.

To the 12th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 13th he saith he was a Common Mariner of the shipp the Advantage that
fought with the Golden Starr and helped to take her. and in case the sayd
Golden Starr be condemned prize he this Rendent expecteth some benefit thereby
as an able mariner according to such proportion as by the Law in that
behalfe made his share shall amount unto. And otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated before the Judges in Court./.

The mark of the sayd [MARKE] Thomas Jeofferyes [MARKE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.20v Annotate
The 22th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Liberty of England et cetera)
against the lading of the White Unicorne)
abd against Jeronimo da Casseres et cetera)

The foresayd 'Claes Albertson' examined upon
the Crosse Interrogatories.

Rowe dt.

To the first Interrogatorie This Rendent saith that he was and is master of the
sayd shipp the White Unicorne and was in her att the tyme when she was
seized by the shipps of this Commonwealth, and hath bene Master of her
about 4 yeares and tooke the first Charge of her att the Port
of Stockholme in Swedland. and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 2 Interrogatorie he saith he this Rendent is Claes Albertson interrate master of the said
shipp, and knoweth well David Andrewes interrate Steersman of the
sayd shipp, and saith that he this Rendent is a man that feares god
and makes conscience of an oath, and will not sweare or depose an
untruth, and he taketh the sayd David Andrewes to be such a one
likewise, and that they were both in January last past and
the last day thereof and before and since honsest men and true
and such as being examined upon their oathes before a Magistrate
would depose the truth and nothing but what they knowe or did in their
conscience verily beleive to be true, and that for such they videlicet this
Rendent and the sayd David Andrewes were then commonly accounted
reputed and taken. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3 Interrogatorie This Rendent saith that towards the latter end of the
moneth of January last past the tyme he otherwise remembreth not
being after the sayd shipp White Unicorne was taken, He this
Rendent was brought into Plymouth before one there he
tooke to be a Magistrate of the Towne, but what his name or office
was or is he knoweth not, and saith the sayd person did administer
an oath to this Rendent to speake the truth by an Interpreter a
young man speaking the English and Dutch tongues, and thereupon
this deponent was by the sayd Interpreter examined, and att the tyme
of his being so examined another young man did write upon
paper, but whether he were a publiq notary or noe, or whether
he did write downe this Rendents Confessions or noe, or whether
the foresayd Interpreter were a sworne Interpreter or noe This
Rendent knoweth not. And he saith that he did not then affirme
or declare upon his oath any thing which was not true or whereof
he had not certayne knowledge neither was he instigated or perswaded
by any one to speake or declare anything false or that he did not
know to be true. And further cannot depose, saving he doth
not beleive that the sayd David Andrewes was then and there examined
but did howsoever sett his hand to a paper which was then sayd to be
the Confession or examination of this Rendent.

To the 4.th Interrogatorie This Rendent saith that Mr Samuel fflancklin (sic) one
of the Proctors of this Court did speake to him this Rendent to be examined
in this cause; and saith that noe one hath written to him to that effect, and
that noe person or persons whatsoever hath given him this Rendent any
Instructions what or to what effect he should now depose, nor hath any
one acquainted or told this Rendent that he was mistaken or forsworne
in his former depositions, or that he had deposed more thatn he had certayne
knowledge of, or that a Commission should be procured for the 
reexamination of this deponent or the sayd David Andrewes, nor that
he
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.21r Annotate
he this Rendent should now say or declare upon his oath contrary to what he 
hath formerly sworne, or that he should say and declare upon his oath
that he had noe certaine knowledge of the things or matter which he had
formerly deposed to, or to any such effect. And otherwise he  cannot depose .

To the fifth Interrogatorie This Rendent saith that he doth not knowe 
the partie interrate hereafter following that is to say, Peter fferrol, diego
Wetgen, William de Laudemare Claude de Laudemare, Peter Clemont
John Manier, Manuel Dickson ffrancisco Botelho [?ChaXes], Thomas 
Botelhe de Silvera, the widdow and heyres of Edward Estevan Pira nor
any of them, Balthazar Coelho Alvarez, Marras de Sylva
[?Tunis] Smith, Silvio del Monte Jorgo Yomes de Alemo, Petrus Bronso 
Antonio Correa Bravo, Michael Gomes Bravo, Jeromino de ffonseca
Pina, Nicholas Congnard. Michael Casony, Laurengo Pestana Martins
John Rolls, Mannel de Costa, George Sera Pinsol, Howard de Silva
Manuel Rogrigues, Andrew de Casseres, Edward Nunes, Jaques de
four, domingo Lopez de Silvara, John Arson Gregoriodias. Jaque Langard
Simon Rodriques Chaves Laurengo Pestama Martens Diego Lopez
Torres, Henry de Pas Pinto, Policapo de Olivera, ffernando Rodrigues
Pensa, Dias de [?Mesputa], ffrancys Wally nor any of them. but 
saith he knoweth one of the parties interrate, that is to say, Jeromimo de 
Casseres, and hath knowne him since the moneth of december last past
1652 and noe longer, and saith he saw him att Lisbone when the shipp
the White Unicorne was last there, And saith the sayd Jeromimo de
Casseres is by comon repute a Portuguese and a subiect of the King 
of Portugall, and is an Inhabitant of Lisborne And this 
Rendent did never heare that he hath at any tyme inhabited att or in
any other place but Lisborne. And otherwise cannot depose. 

Repeated before the Judges in Court.

Claes [Xlbertsey] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE] 
----
The 24th day of October 1653. 

The Keepers et cetera against the Lewis' et cetera)

Examined upon the sayy allegation

Rowe dt.

3

Richard Moore of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Mariner, masters mate of the Kentish frigott, 47 
yeares of age or thereabouts a witnes sworne and 
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth 
that It is notorious as he beleiveth, That this Commonwealth of 
England by the violences miscarriages and irregular proceedings of
the ffrench King and also of the states of the united Provinces and
of their respective subjects hath suffered losse and dammage to a very
great value, and that there are universall reprizalls graunted 
against the ffrench and Dutch Nations for reperation and satisfaction
for the sayd dammages, and that for that purpose All shipps of war 
in the immediate service of this Commonwealth are authorized and empowered 
to take and seize all shipps and goods at sea belonging to the sayd 
ffrench or to the States of the united Provinces or to their respective 
subjects. And otherwwise he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.21v Annotate
To the second Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that soone
after the [?] of the sayd shipp the Lewis by the Kentish frigat
soe[?] this deponent heard some of the Company of the Lewis but whom
in particular he remembereth not confess and declare that the sayd shipp
the Lewis was a ffrench vessell belonging to the port of Rochell[?] 
where her Owners lived, and that she began her outward voyage
from Rochell. And otherwise he cannot depose. 

To the third Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon a
Sunday in the forename in the moneth of August last past and 
not farr from the beginning thereof as he now remembereth 
the tyme the Kentish frigot one of the shippes in the imediate
service of the Commonwealth commanded by Captain Reynolds his [?] 
did seize and surprize the sayd shipp the Lewis and all her lading
which this deponent knoweth being masters mate of the Kentish frigot 
and presenting her att the tyme of seizure. And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the fourth ARticle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd 
shipp the Lewis tooke in the goods that were seized in her att Greenland
and [?]  was evident aswell by the lading it selfe as by the 
Confession of the Master and Company of her, but whither the sayd
shipp and lading were bound this deponent heard not the sayd master
or Company acknowledge nor doth certainly knowe, but beleiveth they 
were bound for the [?] of Holland aswell by the Course she the Lewis [?)
as by some words he heard some of her Company speake [?] that 
they did take the [?] [?] a place where to which they were seized 
to be the [?]. And otherwise he cannot depose. 

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd shipp the
Lewis was taken and seized neare a place or Ilsand called Holygoland[?] 
which is the direct way from Greenland to the Tepell[?] and was and is 
farr distant from the neerest and most usual course from Greenland
to ffrance[?], and saith that the said Holygoland[?) is not farr from the 
Tepell[?) and by the course the Lewis made, It was and is evident to this 
deponent that the sayd shipp was sayling for or to the Tepell[?], att the 
tyme when in this deponent present she was seized as aforesaid by that 
Kentish frigot. And otherwise he cannot depose. 

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith he heard some of the 
Company of the Lewis say that about three dayes before the seizure
aforesayd they had bene in the company of two other french shipps.
And further he cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that so farr as 
this deponent knoweth saw or hath heard there was noe license[?] from the
Right Honorable the Counsell of State aboard the sayd shipp the Lewis for her 
safe passage to ffrance. And otherwise saving his foregoing depositions
he cannot depose. 

To the eight article of the sayd allegation and [?] [?] therein mentioned[?]. This deponent saith he cannot 
deponent. 

To the ninth article of the sayd allegation and schedule therein mentioned This deponent 
saith he cannot depose 

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.22r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatory This Rendent saith that the sayd shipp the Lewis or
?Lowisa was taken neere to Holy yeland by the Kentish frigot whereof Captaine
Reynolds was Commander and this Rendent masters mate, and saith he
comes to be examined as a witnes by the meanes of the sayd Captaine
Reynolds, and saith he knoweth not what he is to have if the sayd shipp
and goods be condemned.  And as for the Hunter and her lading
he knoweth nothing thereof.  And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatorye This Rendent saith that there
was about 15 tonne of oyle taken out of the Lousia (sic) and sent upp in a
hoy to this port of London but by whose order he knoweth not, but doth
beleive It was sent to London by the Order of the sayd Captaine Reynolds.
and saith he doth not endeavour to procure the sayd shipps Lowisa and
Hunter and their lading to be condemned for prize, but being sworne
in Court in a legall way to speake the truth in this cause hath now declared
the same according to his knowledge. And saith that Captaine Brandley
Commander of the Squadron whereto the Kentish frigot did
belong, did cause three small Iron gunnes with their carriages wormes
sponges and other appartenances to be taken out of the Lowisa into the
Kentish frigot for the service of this Commonwealth.  And further he
cannot depose.

the marke of the 'R' [HIS MARK] sayd
Richard Moore [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin
----
The 26th day of October 1653.

The Clayme of don Sebastain Cortizos of)
Madrid for one hundred and eleven sackes)
of wooll of the first marke and nine sackes)
of wooll of the second marke Laden in the)
shipp Saint Augustin whereof Simon Johnson)
Abequert master taken by some of the)
Parliament shipps under the Command of)
Captaine Badily)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd Don Sebastian Cortizos.

Henrique Jorge Mendez of Antwerpe
in Brabant merchant aged forty eight
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
and deposeth that he hath knowne the arlate Don Sebastian da Cortizos
from his youth, and saith that he hath for twenty yeares now past bene
and now is an Assentista of his Catholique Majestie the King of Spaine and
doth furnish his sayd Majestie with moneyes for his occasions in Italy and
fflanders, And that the sayd Don Sebastian da Cortizos in January ffebruary
and March last past 1652 and in March Aprill and May 1653 was and att
this present the true and lawfull Owner and proprietor of one hundred and
eleven sackes of wool of the first marke in the margent and of nyne
sackes more of wooll of the second marke in the margent, and that in or
about the moneth of January 1652 the sayd Don Sebastian da Cortizos did
att or neere Allicant in Spaine cause the sayd 111 sackes of wool of the
first marke in the margent and the sayd nyne sackes of wool of the second
marke in the margent to be laden on board the sayd shipp the Saint Augustine
Simon Johnson Abaqaert Master to be carryed and transported from thence
to
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.22v Annotate
to Venice and there to be delivered unto Don Augustin de ffonseca
for the use and Accompt of the producent, and the proceed thereof to
be imployed in the service and upon the Occasion of his sayd Catholique
Majesty in Italy and fflanders, the premisses this deponent knoweth to be
true for that hee is under paymaster Generall of the King of Spaines
Army in fflanders, he did about ffebruary last past 1652, receyve
letters of Advise from the Correspondents of the Producents living
att Madrid wherein they did certify this deponent that the fowrsayd
wools of the respective markes aforesayd were about the tyme aforesays
laden att Alicant in the sayd shipp Saint Augustin to be transported to Venice
and there to be delivered for the use and Accompt and for the service
aforesayd, And this deponent having had for many yeares past
constant correspondence with the sayd Assentista, the producent knoweth,
that he the sayd producent doth usually cause his wools to be marked
with th respective markes afore sett forth.  And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath credibly
heard and verily beleiveth it to be true, that the sayd shipp the Saint Augustin
after lading of the sayd woolls did sett sayle therewith towards Venice
and in her course thither was together with the sayd wools then on
board her seized by force of the shipps of this Commonwealth under
the Command of Captaine Badily, and that by reason of the sayd seizure
the wools aforesayd came into the hands and possession of the sayd
Captaine Badily.  And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth and sixth Articles of the sayd allon This deponent saith
that the sayd 120 sackes of wools were really laden and provided for the
Accompt aforesayd and the proceed thereof were to have bene really
employed for and in the Affaires of his Catholiq Majesty. And this
deponent himselfe about July last past did deliver to the Spanish
Ambassador here Resident a Letter from his sayd Majesty touching the
foresayd woolls and the seeking after restitution thereof.  And saith
that albeit the sayd wools in the bills of lading for the same found
aboard the sayd shipp be ontrue (sic) for the Accompt of Augustine da ffonseca
of venice, yet the same was and is done onely to secure the same from
the ffrench, and saith It is usuall for the sayd producent so to secure
his wools which this deponent knoweth by the correspondence hee holds
with the sayd producent and the sayd Augustine da ffonseca with both
of whom he hath familiar Acquaintance.  And otherwise he cannot
depose saving that noe dutchman subiect of the State of the united
Provinces of ffrenchman subiect of the ffrench King had or hath any
right title or Interest in the same or any part thereof.

To the seventh Article of the sayd allegation  This deponent daith that the sayd
Sebastian da Cortizo was and is a Spaniard borne and lives in Madrid
where he was borne and hath in habited for theis 20 yeares last and
indeed all his tyme.  and was and is a subiect of the King of Spaine
and so accounted.  And saith the sayd Augustin da ffonseca is likewise
by birth a Spaniard but by habitacon of Venice where he hath lived
for about .16. yeares now past, and was and is a subiect of the State
of Venice and so accounted, all which this deponent well knoweth by his
acquaintance &amp; Correspondencyes with both the sayd paties. And otherwise
he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.23r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first negatively.

To the 2d he saith he had knowne the producent for his youth and saith he is a
Spaniard and inhabitates in Madrid with his family and was borne there and ther
hath lived all the tyme, and his house is in the street called A[?locka].

To the 3d he saith he was not present att the buying the woolls in question
but knoweth that the producent doth usually deale in wools. and otherwise
saving his foregoeing depositions wherto he referreth himselfe hee
cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith he was not att Allicant neyther saw the wools in question
in the producents possession. but saith he keepes [?continuall] and constant
correspondencyes with the producent and thereby well understandeth his busines
and trade, and thereby understandeth that ffrancisco and Gaspard da Maxito
Spaniards Inhabitants of Allicant did lade the wools in question for the
Accompt aforesayd.  And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth Interrogatorie negatively

To the 6th Interrogatory negatively to every part thereof.

To the 7th Interry he saith he is a native of Lisboa in Portugall and is
an Inhabitant of Antwerpe. and otherwise negiatively.

To the 8. 9. 10 and 11th Interrogatories he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

HENRIQUE[XXX] [XXXX ?MENE]  [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

SAM DELA[XXXX] [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the [XXX] Judges
----
The 26th day of October 1653

The keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority)
of Parliament against the shipps mentioned in the schedule)
herunto annexed and the severall goods wares)
and merchandizes therein respectively taken)
and seized by the shipp named the Elizabeth)
ffrigot whereof Christofer Myngs was Master)
in the immediate service of this Commonwealth)
[?Bud] Suckley.)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the Keepers of
the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament.

1.

John Major of East Smith feild in the County
of Middlessex Leiftenanant of the Elizabeth
frigot in the immediate service of this Commonwealth
aged five and twenty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth.

[?Rew d:?t]

To the first article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that on or about
the third day of this Instant October the arlate Captaine Christopher Myngs
haveing espyed att sea about four leagues off deepe a ffleet of
shipps consisting of twenty four sayle whereof the shipps hereafter
specifyed were part that is to say The [?fflean] Boyde Peterson Master. The Hope
Martin Mi[XX]dorson Master, The Gideon. Gerdt ffal?cas Master. The [?Mercury] Jan de[?toire] Master
The Hope Henry Caven Master. The [XXXXX] Clases Van?Reden Master. The ffortune ?Barnde van
Danck Master.  The ffortune Joachim ?Devok Master The Hope Henrdrick Martin Master. The King David
[?W]eitt Weittenson Master. The Salvator Henry Dorder Master. The Hope John Peterson Master.  The Saint Anthony
Zacharia [?Wild] Master. The ffortune Arient Ga[?llen?tyneMaster Master. The Mathew Claes [?Billiet] Master.  The
Golden Butt Hans Clasesin Master. The [?Car fange]r Bernt [?Carfanger] Master The King David Jacob Young
Master. The Golden [?ffan] Peter Eppon Master. The Prophet Elias Simon Cornelias Master
gave chase unto them from about nine of the Clock in the Morning untill
two in the afternoone, and about that tyme came neer and allmost upp
to the hindermost or Reare of them which this deponent knoweth being
Leivetenant of the sayd shipp, and an eye witness of the premisses, And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.23v Annotate
To the second article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that three of the
sayd 24 sayle of shipps were Hollands Men of Warr, and did conduct
or Convoy the other 21 shipps, two of the sayd Men of warr sayling
in the head of the sayd ffleet, and one of them to Leeward, and saith
he knoweth that the sayd Men of warr were Holland shipps by the holland
Colours which they were under which they fought with and against the
sayd Elizabeth frigot wherein this deponent was the tyme aforesaid
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that of his sight the
foresayd s Hollands men of warr att the head of the foresayd ffleet did
for severall howres chase the arlate English shipp being a Private
Man of warr Commanded by the arlate Allington, and for and during
the sayd Chase, the other twenty two shipps followed on after the sayd
two men of warr that chased the English shipp as aforesayd, for the
space of 4 or 5 howres. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith, that of his certaine
nowledge, and sight the sayd Elizabeth frigot att the tyme she came upp
with the foresayd ffleet wore out the English Colours, and the sayd
three hollands men of warr had and wore out the Hollands Colours. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that of his like certayne
knowledge and sight, when the Elizabeth frigot came upp with the
rere of the sayd ffleet, the foresayd two Hollands men of warr tacked
upon the Elizabeth and to the Rescue of the sayd ffleet as this deponent
verily beleiveth. and saith of his like sight the foresayd ffleet kept
not on their way, but together with the sayd Hollands Men of warr
tacked upon the Elizabeth frigot, which they so did as this deponent
did then and still doth assuredly beleive in Assistance of the sayd
Hollands Men of warr against the Elizabeth. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that the sayd two holland
men of warr being most weatherly of all the sayd ffleet came upp
with the Elizabeth frigot and exchanged their broad sides with her,
and tacked upon her againe, but having receyved some hurt from
her bore off to the Leeward through the sayd ffleet to the sayd third
Man of warr of their Company, and one of the Merchants shipps
of the sayd ffleet got off with them. which he knoweth seeing and
well observing the premisses and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the seaventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that of his
certaine knowledge sight and observation the afore named shipps
being the shipps schedulate, who were within shott of the sayd shipps
that fought, did not during the sayd fight strike to the Elizabeth
frigat nor afterwards till such tyme as the Elizabeth bore in upon
them, and fired att them, neyther did they putt abroad any Colours
or use any meanes, so farr as this deponent being there present could
see or discerne, to lett the Elizabeth know and understand that they were
not Hollanders and enemyes of this Commonwealth And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation, this deponent saith that the sayd shipps
above specifyed being the shipps schedulat were taken in the Company
and under the Conduct and convoy of the Enemyes of this Commonwealth
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.24r Annotate
and of those who were as aforesayd in Actuall ffight against the English
And he saith, he is well assured that the Masters and Company of the
sayd respective shipps schedulat did take notice of the sayd fight for
that they tacked about in assistance of the Hollands Men of warr as
aforesayd, and afterwards fledd from the Elizabeth; And they so
fleeing were fallen upon by the Elizabeth and taken by her, but
did not strike to her till she had made severall shott against them.
And otherwise he cannot depose saving that he everily beleiveth that
the Masters and Companyes of the sayd severall shipps did and doe
well know, and could not but observe and take notice that the sayd two
shipps of warr that so fought the Elizabeth as aforesayd were Hollands
Men of warr.

To the ninth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipps
schedulat being subdued and come by the Lee of the Elizabeth, the foresayd
Captaine Myngs commanded their boates aboard him, and secured about 18.
of their maisters, and manned four of their vesssells, but whether any
gunnes were primed and [?Lingstockes] lighted standing by them in the
sayd vessells he cannot depose.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that there was not
any English shipps besides the Elizabeth within shott of the sayd shipps
schedulat, or any of them untill they had yeilded to the Elizabeth frigot
and were subdued by her. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the twelfth article of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.24v Annotate
To the fifth Interrogatorie, he saith the Elizabeth frigot is an able vessell of
40 gunnes and beleiveth that there were about 40 gunnes in the sayd
merchants shipps. And saith, he is not able to depose or guesse what
the event might have bene, in case the sayd merchants shipps had ioyned
with the Hollands men of warr, but beleiveth the Elizabeth could have
sayled and fledd safe from them att the woorst.

To the 6th Interrogatory he saith he hath not so deposed.

To the 7th Interrogatorie he saith that the sayd merchants shipps did submitt
themselves to the Elizabeth without firing any gunnes against her
And otherwise to this Interrogatorie he cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin.

John Major [SIGNATURE RIGHT HAND]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2.

John Painter of Wincanton in the County of Somersett
Mariner one of the Company of the Elizabeth frigot
in the immediat service of this Commonwealth aged
eighteene yeares or thereabouts, a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first, second, third, fourth fifth and sixth Articles of the sayd allegation
This deponent saith and deposeth, That the Captaine and Companie of the
Elizabeth frigot in or about the beginning of this Instant October about eight
of the Clock in a morning espyed off of deipe, a ffleet of shipps of
about [?28] sayle whereof the shipps schedulate were [?a] part, and about
one or two of the Clock in the afternoone came up with them, And saith that
att the head of the sayd ffleet were two men of warr of Holland
and another to the Leeward, which sayd men of warr before the Elizabeth
came upp for severall howres gave chase to an English privat Man of
warr, and during the Chase of the sayd private Man of warr, the foresayd
ffleet stood off, and on, in the selfe same Course with the Hollands men of
warr. And further saith, that assoone as the Elizabeth came upp with
the Reare of the sayd ffleet, the sayd 2 Hollands Men of warr tacked [?about]
upon the Elizabeth to the Rescue of the sayd ffleet, and the sayd ffleet
thereupon tacked about, and stood the same course in the assistance of the
sayd Hollands Men of warr, who as he saith exchanged some broad
sides with the Elizabeth, and broke her mainmast, foremast, [?bolstsprit]
and slew the master of her, and seeing the Elizabeth beare upon [?them]
fledd through the sayd ffleet to their other Consort to Leeward all [?which]
this deponent knoweth, being one of the Company of the Elizabeth, and
saw, and observed the premisses, and otherwise cannot depose saving [?that]
the sayd Elizabeth frigot the tyme predeposed had and wore out the
Colours of this Commonwealth, and that the foresayd Holland men of warr
had, and wore out the colours of the Hollanders, and were a Convoy of
and for the ffleet aforesayd.

To the seventh, and eighth Articles of the said allegation, This deponent saith
that during the sayd ffight, the foresayd Merchants shipps schedulate
did not [?strike] to the Elizabeth, albeit they were within shot, till the [?Eliza=]
beth fell in upon them, and fired four or five gunns att them, but
saith they tacked about in assistance of the Hollands Men of warr, and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.25r Annotate
putt not out any Colours whereby they might or could be discerned from
being Enemyes, and were afterwards taken in Company and under
Conduct and Convoy of the foresayd Hollands men of warr standing
the same Course with them, and fleeing from the Elizabeth till they
were taken and subdued. And otherwise he cannot depose saving that
he saw and observed well the passages aforesayd.

To the nynth article he cannot depose, saving that Captaine Mynns arlate
secured severall of the Maisters of the sayd fleet, and manned four of their
Vessells, after they were seized and subdued.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith, that he heard the [?Boatswain]
of the Hope Martin Minders Master, being one of the Vessells or shipps
schedulat taken by the Elizabeth, confesse and acknowledge in the downes
soone after the seizure, that the sayd shipp the Hope began her voyage
from Amsterdam, and thither was to returne with her lading in case she
had proceeded on her voyage, and that all the Company of her except the
Master, were Hollanders and otherwise referring himselfe to his
foregoeing depositions he cannot depose

saving that of the sight
of this deponent, there
was found aboard the
sayd shipp the Hope
immediately upon her
seizure a Holland flagg
ript and parted asunder.

John Painter
his marke.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that there was not
any English shipp within shott of any of the shippes schedulate, untill
they had yeilded to the Elizabeth frigot, and were subdued by her. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the twelfth Article of the sayd allegation He saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1 Interrogatorie he saith he was one of the Companie of the shipp Elizabeth
[?Interrogate], and saith that being produced as a witnes on behalfe of the
Commonwealth he doth endeavour to discover the truth upon all such matters
whereon he is examined and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2 negatively to every part thereof.

To the 3 he saith that any shipps of warr eyther of this, or any other Nation
may overtake merchants vessells in the sea, and goe in Company with them,
and (in case they be better Saylers) may [?ware] them doe what they can.

To the 4 he saith he doth not know when or where the sayd ffleet was taken
to Convoy by the sayd Hollands Men of warr; nor doth he know or beleive
that they mett accidentally and saith the sayd merchants vessells were
not becalmed att all but had wind enough to have carryed them on their Course
att the tyme the Elizabeth and Hollands men of warr shott att each other
and saith the sayd ffleet was about three quarters of a mile from the sayd
shipps that fought att the tyme of fight and not more as he beleiveth. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth Interrogatory he saith that the Elizabeth is an able frigot
of about 42 gunnes, but knoweth not how many gunnes were in the sayd
ffleet, and saith he doth not know or beleive in his conscience that the
sayd ffleet Ioyning with the men of warr could have overcome the
Elizabeth in case her Captaine and Company had behaved themselves
like valiant and prudent men, which if they had bene putt to it
they would have done, as he beleiveth. And otherwise cannot depose

To the sixth Interrogatory he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the seventh Interrogatorie he saith, the sayd Merchants vessells did submitt to
the Elizabeth without firing any gunnes against her, but not willingly as
he beleiveth for the Reasons aforesayd. And further he cannot depose saving
he saith that when Captaine Phillips his vessell shott she was about 2 miles
out of shott of the ffleet aforesayd

John Painter his marke
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.25v Annotate
The  27th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3

Thomas Crosse of Limehouse in the County of Middlesex Mariner
masters mate of the Elizabeth frigat aged two and forty
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined saith.

To the first second third fourth fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation he saith
That upon the third day of this Instant October about eight or nyne in the
morning, the arlate Christopher Mynns Commander of the Elizabeth frigot in the
immediate service of this Commonwealth and Company of the same, espyed upon the
Coast of ffrance off of deipe a fleet of shipps consisting of about 24 sayle
and gave Chase unto them, and about two in the afternoone came
upp with the Rearre of them, and saith the shipps schedulate were twenty
shipps of the foresayd ffleet, videlicet the fflora. Gideon. Mercury. Brewer. Salvador
Saint Anthony. Matthew. Car fanyer. Golden Star. Prophet Elias. 4 by the
name of Hope. 3 by the name of ffortune. and 2 by the name of King
David. and that there was att the head of the sayd ffleet two dutch or
Hollands men of warr, and one Hollands man of warr to their Leeward
which men of warr were for the Convoy and Conduct of the ffleet
aforesayd. and that the sayd two headmost shipps of warr gave chase
to a private man of warr of this Commonwealth where of Captaine Allington
arlate had the Command, and that upon the approach of the Elizabeth
neer to the sayd ffleet the foresayd two Men of Warr of Holland left
the pursuit of Captaine Allington and tacked about upon the Elizabeth
for the Rescue of the ffleet. and saith he knoweth the sayd Men of
Warr with the sayd ffleet were Hollands men of warr for that they
wore the Hollands colours and under those Colours exchanged some
broadsides with the Elizabeth wearing the English Colours and shott through
her masts, and killed her master, and afterwards finding themselves
too weake fell to their Consort man of warr to the Leeward and is
fully assured that the sayd ffleet was under the Conduct and
Convoy of the sayd Hollands men of warr, for that they steered the
same course with them, and stood off and on after the sayd Captaine Allington [?XXXX]
with them, and upon the tacking of them towards the Elizabeth as aforesayd
tacked allso about with them in their assistance, and allso for that they
wore noe colours. And otherwise cannot depose saving his subsequent
depositions, and saving that the Elizabeth att the tyme aforesayd had and
wore out the Parliament Colours or Colours of this Commonwealth, and that he knoweth
the premisses being present and aboard the Elizabeth frigot the tyme aforesayd

To the seaventh and eighth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that [?the]
foresayd ffleet was within shott of the shipps that fought att the tyme of
fight, and tacked about against the Elizabeth with the foresayd hollans men
of warr, and saith that the sayd ffleet did not strike to the Elizabeth till
after the men of warr were fledd, and that the Elizabeth was fallen
amongst them and had made four or five shott att them, and saith the
sayd ffleet putt not out any Colours to distinguish them from Hollanders
and enemyes, but were in Company and convoy of the Hollands men
of warr as aforesayd, and could not but take notice that the sayd shipps of
warr that fought with the Elizabeth were Hollands men of warr, tacking
when they tackt, and fleeing when they fledd. and saith that they were
att last taken and subdued by the Elizabeth frigat in their flight from
her, which he knoweth being an eyewitnes of the premisses. And
otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.26r Annotate
To the ninth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the doresayd 20 merchants
shipps being subdued as aforesayd Captaine Mymes secured about 18 of their Masters
and manned some of the vessells. and saith that of the sight of this deponent
one of the foresayd shipps videlicet the Hope whereof Hendrick Martin was
Master being a good shipp of 13 gunnes had att the seizure of her by
the English eight gunnes ready primed four in her steerage and four
in her forecastle and two Limstockes ready lighted standing by the sayd
primed gunns which he knoweth being one that first tooke possession of
her after she was subdued.

To the 10th article of the sayd allegation he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing
depositions and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 11th article of the sayd allegation he saith that there was not any English
shipp or vessell within shott of any of the foresayd shipps subdued as
aforesayd untill after they had all yeilded to the Elizabeth frigat and were
subdued by her, but saith there was a small vessell of dover commanded
by Captaine Allington aforesayd att that tyme about 2 leagues off att sea and
allmost, being a small vessell, out of sight.

To the 12th article of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. Interrogatory he saith he was masters mate of the Elizabeth frigot, and
comes by command to testify the truth in behalfe of the Commonwealth. And
further cannot depose.

To the 2. Interrogatorrie negatively to every part thereof.

To the .3. Interrogatory he saith shipps of warr may meet merchants shipps
att sea and in case they be better saylers may accompany or [?ware] them
whether they will or noe.

To the .4. Interrogatory he saith he knoweth not when or where the foresayd ffleet was
taken to Convoy nor can depose positively whether they mett accidentally
att sea, but referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions. And saith
there was so fair a gale of wind the tyme interrate that the sayd ffleet
might have kept on their course, and were not becalmed nor necessitated
to tack about with the Hollands men of warr, and saith the merchants
men were att the tyme of fight about a mile from the shipps that fought.

To the 5 Interrogatory he saith the Elizabeth is an able frigot of .40. gunnes, and
saith that in case the Elizabeth had bene engaged with the men of warr
in fight and that the sayd merchants shipps had ioyned in fight
fought in assistance of the Hollands men of warr the Elizabeth in
probability would have bene overcome by them as he beleiveth. and
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 6th Interrogatory he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 7th Interrogatory he saith the sayd merchants shipps did submitt themselves
without fireing att the Elizabeth. but not willingly. and otherwise saving
his foregoeing depositions whereto he referreth he cannot depose.

Repeated with his precontest)
before the Judges in Court)

Thomas '+' Crosse
his marke/ [MARKE, RH SIDE]


HCA 13/68 f.26v Annotate
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4

William Ash of Weymouth in the County of dorset Mariner
one of the Company of the Elizabeth frigat aged
twenty two yeares sworne and examined saith

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation he saith that about the 3d day
of October the sayd frigott Elizabeth chased a ffleet of shipps of about
23 sayle from about 9 in the morning till 2 pm the afternoon the sayd
fleet being upon the Cast of ffrance about 6 leagues off of deepe. and
that there were att the head of the sayd ffleet 2 men of warr and att the Lee
one man of warr and that the sayd Men of warr were Hollanders and
a Convoy of and for the sayd ffleet. which he knoweth being then present
in the Elizabeth and for the reasons hereafter sett forth. and otherwise
cannot depose, saving the shipps schedulat are the merchants shipps of the sayd fleet

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
sayd dutch men of warr gave chase to an English vessell of dover whereof
the arlate Allington was Captaine, and were in actuall chase of her when
the Elizabeth came upp, and the whole ffleet for neere 4 or five howres
stood the same Course after the Hollands men of warr off and on as they
chased Captaine Allington, and att that tyme the sayd Hollands men of
warr had and wore out the Hollands Colours and the Elizabeth wore out
the English Colours, which he knoweth being an eyewitnes of the
premisses. and otherwise cannot depose./

To the fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation he saith that upon the comeing
up of the Elizabeth were the hindermost of the sayd ffleet the foresayd
Hollands men of warr att the head, forsooke Captaine Allingtons course
and tacked upon the Elizabeth in [?rescue] of the sayd fffleet, and the
merchants shipps of the ffleet tacked likewise about with the sayd
Men of warr in their assistance, and that the sayd two hollands men of
warr being weatherly of the ffleet bore in upon the Elizabeth and
exchanged their broadsides with her, and afterwards fell off and
fledd through the ffleet to the other Hollands man of warr to the
Leeward, all which this deponent being then present saw and observed
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the seventh and eighth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the sayd merchants shipps were within shott of the shipps that fought
and could not but take notice that the shipps that fought the Elizabeth
were Hollands men of warr, howbeit he saith that the sayd ffleet
of merchant men did not strike to the Elizabeth nor show any colours
whereby the Elizabeth might discerne them to be freinds and not
Enemyes, till such tyme as the sayd Men of warr fleed and the
Elizabeth fell in amongst them and by shooting forced them to [?XXXX]
[?XXX], but saith they were in Company and convoy of the Hollands
Men of warr as aforesayd, and bare upp the same Course with them and
tacxked when they tackt and fledd when they fled, and flyeing were
taken and subdued by the Elizabeth frigot wherein this deponent [?was]
the tyme aforesayd and saw and well observed the premisses And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.27r Annotate
To the nynth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd merchants shipps being
subdued Captaine Mynnes secured most of their masters and manned some of
the vessells. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation he saith he heard the Boatswayne of one of
the sayd subdued shipps videlicet the Hope Martin Minders master say and dec;are
that the sayd shipp Hope came from Amsterdam and was bought there by her
master, and came last from the Texall before she was seized and that all her
Company were Amsterdamers and that she was to returne thither, and that
he spake the sayd words and made the sayd Confession in the presence of
this deponent and his contests Leiftenant Maior, John Painter and others
And further to the Article saving his precedent depositions he cannot
depose.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation he saith there was noe English shipp
within shott of any the shipps schedulate untill they yeilded to the Elizabeth
ffrigott and were subdued by her.

To the twelfth article of the sayd allegation he saith he hath heard some of the
Company of the Elizabeth and particularly one Angell say that he had bene
aboard a dutch vessell the name whereof he knoweth not, and that falling
in discourse there with some Dutch men touching the foresayd twenty shipps
taken as aforesayd by the Elizabeth, the sayd dutchmen as he sayd, told him that
they all or most of them were Holland shipps and that most of them came
last from fflushing, and moreover saith that about five dayes since he
this deponent in speech and discourse with one Peter Lawson living in
Schooles lane in Ratcliffe being lately from Hamburgh, heard
the sayd Lawson say and affirme that there had not for three monthes
before his comeing from Hamburgh any shipps departed or sett sayle
from the sayd Port, three sayle of shipps onely excepted. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the Croose Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1 Interrogatory he saith he was one of the Company of the Elizabeth, and
being summoned to appeare as a witnes for the Commonwealth hath deposed
the truth to the best of his knowledge. and otherwise cannot depose

To the 2d negatively.

To the 3. he saith it is very possible for shipps of warr of any nation
to meet merchant men att sea and company with them and ware them
whether they will or noe.

To the 4 he saith he knoweth not where or when the sayd ffleet or merchant men
was taken to convoy nor whether they mett with the sayd Men of warr att [?XXXX]
but referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions. and saith there was
a faire fresh gale of wind att the tyme interrate, so as the sayd merchants
men were not becalmed, but might have held on their course, and were
about a quarter of a mile distant from the Hollands men of warr
when they fought with the Elizabeth, and not a mile from them
as he beleiveth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 5th he saith the Elizabeth had 40 gunnes and he doth not beleive that the sayd
ffleet with the helpe of their convoy te Hollands men of warr could have
overcome the Elizabeth and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 6. and 7th he saith the foresayd merchants men submitted themselves without
shooting against the Elizabeth, but not willingly. and otherwise cannot depose

William 'O' Ash
his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]


HCA 13/68 f.27v Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING] 

Examined upon the sayd allegation

5.

William Summers of Chichester in the County of Sussex
Mariner one of the Company of the Elizabeth frigate
aged thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworned
and examined deposeth and saith. 

To the 1. article of the sayd allegation he saith that about the third day of October 1653
now instant Captaine [?Mynns] Commander of the sayd Elizabeth frigot and Company 
having espyed a ffleet att sea off of Deepe about 7 or 8 [leagues]; of about
23 [sayle], most whereof [videlicet] the shipps schedulate and here specifyed
were merchant men that is to say. The fflora Boyes Peterson master. The Hope Martin
Minders master. The Hope [Henry Caven] master. The Hope Hendrick Martin master. The Hope John Peterson
master. The Gideon [Gerdt ffalcas] master. The Mercury Jan [?Deterre] master. The Brewer Claus [van]
[?Reden] master. The fortune [Barnds] van [Danke] master. The ffortune Joachim [Dowke] master. The
King David Weil Weittensen master. The King David Jacob Young master. The Salvator [Henry]
[?Doder] master. the Saintt Anthony Zacharia [?Mild] master. the fortune Arient Gallentine master. 
The Matthew Claus [??Billiot] master. The Golden Butt Joans [Cla?eson] master. The [?Carfanger] [Berndt]
[Carfanger] master. The Golden Starr Peter [Eppen] master. The Prophet Elias Simon
[Cornelius] master
[gave] chase to them from nine of the Clock in the morning till about
two in the afternoone which he knoweth being then aboard the Elizabeth and 
otherwise cannot depose. 

To the second article he saith there was 2 Hollands men of warr att the head
of the sayd ffleet, and one Hollands man of warr to their Leeward and
nere a convoy of and for the sayd [merchnats] shipps, which he knoweth
and beleiveth for the reasons [ensuing] and otherwise cannot depose. 

To the third article he saith that of his [sight] the foresayd fleet with their sayd
convoy did not [pursue] and chase a private mann of warr of Dover whereof
Captaine [Allington] was Commander, for the space of 4 or 5 howres. And
otherwise he cannot depose. 

To the 4th article he sath that when the Elizabeth came upp with the sayd ffleet
she wore out the Colours of this Commonwealth and the sayd Hollands men of
[warr] wore out the Hollands Colours, of the deponents sight and knowledge and
otherwise he cannot depose. 

To the 5th article he saith that upon the approach of the Elizabeth towards the
[Reare] of the sayd fleet their foresayd Convoy att their head lacked upon
the Elizabeth to the [rescue] of their merchants, and the merchant men 
[tacked] about allso and stood with them in the assistance of their sayd Holland
Convoy this deponent being an eyewitnes thereof. And otherwise cannot 
depose. 

To the 6th article he saith the sayd 2 Hollands men of warr being [weatherly] of
the ffleet came upp with the Elizabeth and fought with her as is arlate [could write &quot;articulated as expansion]
and [slew] her maister and shoot here mainmast, and afterwards bore upp
into the ffleet and fledd to the Leeward, this deponent seeing and well
observing the premisses, and otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 7 he saith that most of the sayd merchants shipps were within shott att
the tyme of the sayd fight, but they did not strike to the Elizabeth nor put
out any colours till after their convoy was fledd and the Elizabeth [fell]
in among them and made severall shotts att them, which he knoweth for 
the reasons aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 8th article he saith the sayd Merchant shipps were [taken] by the Elizabeth
in Company and under convoy and conduct of the sayd Hollands men of 
warr
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.28r Annotate
warr actually fighting against the English. And saith the masters and Company
of the sayd Merchant men could not but take notice that the sayd shipps that fought
the Elizabeth were Hollands men of warr and enemyes to the English howbeit
he saith they kept not on their way but tacked about in assistance of the sayd
Hhollands men of warr and struck not till the Elizabeth had made 5 or 6 shotts
at them, and were att last taken and subdued in their flight from the
Elizabeth, which he knoweth being then present in the Elizabeth and
otherwise cannot depose. 

To the nynth article he saith that the sayd shipps being subdued Captaine Mynnes did
secure most of their Masters and manned some of their vessells and further
he cannot depose. 

To the tenth article he saith he heard the Boatswaine of the sayd shipp Hope Martin Minders
master saye and affirme in the presence of this deponent and his contests, Major
Paynter and Ash that the sayd shipp Hope came frome Amsterdam and was
to returne thither att her comeing from Ffrance with her ladeing, and 
that most of her Company were of Amsterdam and all Hollanders but the
master. and saith there was of this deponents sight an hollands Ancient
being ript and torne aboard the sayd shipp Hope and the sayd Boatswayne
did confess and declare that the sayd vessell was good prize to the English
and that himselfe was an Amsterdammer and had his wife and family there.
and otherwise referring himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he 
saith he cannot depose.

To the eleventh article he saith there was a private man of warr of Dover about 2 leagues
off att sea when the said ffleet was subdued, but there was not any English vessell
att all within shott of the sayd ffleet or any of them when they were 
subdued by the Elizabeth so farr as this deponent knoweth or hath heard. 

To the 12th article he saith he heard the foresayd Boatswayne of the Hope 
say that some of the sayd ffleet or merchant men thereof not naming
which of them came lately from fflushing and otherwise he cannot
depose.
----
[CENTRE HEADING] To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. Interrogatory he saith he was one of the shipp Elizabeth her Company
and testifyed the truth so farr as he knowes. and otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 2. Interrogatory negatively to every point thereof. 

To the 3. Interrogatory he saith that shipps of warr of any nation may meet merchant
men att sea and Company with them or [?ware] them. 

To the 4. he saith he knoweth not where the Merchants men were taken to 
convoy, nor whether they mett accidentally att sea and saith the sayd shipps
were not be becalmed but had a fine leading gale of wind and might have
gone on their course from the Elizabeth if they had not tacked and stood with their
sayd Holland convoy. and saith that some of the sayd merchants shipps were
about a mile, some about halfe a mile, some about a quarter of a mile
from the sayd shipps that fought att the tyme of fight, and otherwise saving
his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose. 

To the 5. 6. and 7th interrogatories he saith that the Elizabeth had 40 gummes 
[?and might have bene subdued by the sayd ffleet at merchants and men off warr]
if they had  vigorously applyed themselves in fight against her as he beleiveth and saith the sayd
Merchant shipps did not submitt willingly, but did howsoever submitt to the
Elizabeth without firing any [gummes] against her and otherwise saving his
foregoing depositions cannot depose. 

[LEFT] Repeated with
his precontest in
Court before the Judges

[RIGHT] William 'S.' Summers
his marke
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.28v Annotate
The Clayme of John Hawkes et cetera for their 
goods in the Young Boar

The 27th day of October. 1653.
Examined vpon the sayd Allegation.

Andreas Hawkes of Revel in Lufland under
the Crowne of Sweden merchant aged one and
twenty yeares or thereabout a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the monethes
of May June and July last 1653 the arlate John Hawkes
was and att present is the lawfull owner of twenty lasts of Rye and f[our?]
and twenty lasts of barley schedulat. and the sayd Jamb? Hoffer??
the tyme aforesayd was and now is the lawfull owner of twenty lasts of 
Rye and twenty lasts of barley. And the sayd Claes Steding was and is
the lawfull Owner of ten lasts of Rye. And the sayd Constance
Corfemaker then was and now is the lawfull Owner of twenty three
shipp pound of fflax which is in English weight six thowsand nyne
hundred pound weight; And the sayd Derrick Hetling then was and
now is Lawfull owner of twenty shipp pound of Muscovy leather
which is in ordinary English weight six thousand pound weight. And
the sayd Matthias Witt then was and now is the lawfull Owner of eleven
lasts of Rye. And Thomas Eyke was and is lawfull Owner of five lasts
of Wheate schedulat, And the sayd Hans Loer then was and now is the 
lawfull Owner of eight lasts of Rye. and Claes Yat or fflorez Yatt was then and is
the Owner of six lasts of Barly, The Reason of this deponents Knowledge
of the premisses was and is that he Knoweth well all the sayd persons and
that they are merchants of good esteeme that doe vsually trage in such
goods, and hath credibly heard and verily beleiveth that they the foresayd
respective Owners did att Revell in May last lade all and singular the 
foresayd goods for their respective Accompts as aforesayd aboard the
sayd shipp the 'Young Boer', and they have by letters signified to this
deponent that they the sayd Claymers were and are the lawfull and 
sole Owners of the sayd goods respectively mentioned as aforesayd. 
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second third fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that he hath credibly Heard and verily beleiveth that the foresayd respect[ive]
persons did att Revell in May last past by themselves severally lade aboard
the sayd shipp 'Young Boer' Jacob Cornelison Master all and singular the
goods before severally mentioned for their owne Accompts respectively
and that they consigned the same to their respective factors att Amsterdam
to be in the sayd shipp transported to Amsterdam and there to be delivered 
to their respective factors to whom they were consigned, and that they
did severally and respectively send with the sayd goods letters of advise 
to their sayd factors for disposeing of the sayd goods to the sayd Owners
Accompt respectively, and that the sayd shipp 'Young Boer' sett sayle
and departed with the sayd goods from Revell and in her Course to
Amsterdam was taken and seized by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth
and that the sayd goods and letters of advise were then aboard her
and came into the possession of the Takers. and farther cannot depose
saving that noe dutchman or other subiect of the States of the vnited 
Provinces or french King or of any Prince or State in hostility
with this Commonwealth had or hath any share or Interest there in the sayd
goods or any of them.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.29r Annotate
To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth That the
sayd John hawkes Jacob [?Hoffener], Claes Stading, Constan[?ce] Corsemaker
derick [?hetling], Matthias Witt Thomas Eyke hans [?LXXr] and Claes or
fflores [?yut] were and are Swedes and every of them was and is a Swede
and for such commonly accounted, and that they and every of them in the
sayd moneth of May and before and since and indeed for all their
tymes respectively have bene and are Burghers and Inhabitants
and every one of then was and is a Burgher and Inhabitant of
Revel in Lyfelandt under the Crowne of Sweden and were and are
and every of them was and is a subiect of the Queene of Swedland and
so accounted, All which he well knoweth being a native
of Revell and well knowne to and acquainted with the forenamed
persons. And otherwise cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1st negatively.

To the .2.d he saith he was not att Revell att or about the tyme of the
lading the sayd goods. and hath knowne the partyes interrate from his
youth being a native of Revell as aforesayd. and otherwise referring
himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the .3.d he saith he was nott att Revell att the tyme of the lading the
sayd goods nor ever saw the same in the possession of the Claymers.

To the 4. he saith the sayd Producents are natives and Inhabitants of
Revell as aforesayd and there have lived with their families ten yeares
and upwards, videlicet John Hawkes Jacob Hoffener Claes Stading Constans
Corsemaker derrick Hetling and Thomas Eyke when this deponent was
last att Revell had their respective dwellings in Langh street and
Matthias Witts in Carick street, and fflores [?yut] in dwarfe street.
And otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the .6. Interrogatory he saith he is a native of Revell aforesayd an
an Inhabitant of Amsterdam and is the naturall and lawfull sonn of the
foresayd John Hawkes one of the foresayd Claymers. and otherwise
negatively.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.29v Annotate
That Johannes H[awkes] et cetera levert a/c)
Brabant merchant) xx [CHECK THIS PAGE]

Repeated before Colonel Cock 
and Dr Clerke

To the 14th Interrogatory He saith that in case the sayd shipp 'Young Boer'
arrived safely att Amsterdam ? J[ohann]o van H?cke [????] Master [?] Brabant? Have payd and was to ??
part of the freight for the goods in question videlicet for, the goods of Johnes
Hawkes the deponents father. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 15 negatively to every part thereof /

Andreas Haecks [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam De la place  [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
----
The second day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3.

Jacob Wijgandie of Hamburgh merchant aged 
25 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the sixth article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the arlate John Hawkes, Jacob Hoffener, Claes Steding, Constans 
Corfemaker, Derrick Hething, Matthias Witt, Thomas Eyke Hans
Loer and Claes or fflorez Yutt were and are by common repute all Swedish
by birth, and in May and June last past were and for some yeares before
of this deponents knowledge had bene Inhabitants and Burghers, and
every one of them was and is a Burgher and Inhabitant of Revell in
Swedland, and for all the sayd tyme and indeed by common repute for
all their tymes respectively have bene and are, and every of them 
was and is a subject of the Queen of Swethland and for and as such
com[m?] only accounted and reputed, All which he knoweth having for
sometymes lived att Revell, where being and restding in the
quality of a merchant factors he came to know the forsayd parties, and had
particular knowledge and acquaintance of and with the sayd John Hawkes
who was and is as he saith a merchant of good ranke and one of the 
Burgomasters of the sayd Citty of Revell. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories
To the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. Interrogatories he saith he did never belong to the sayd
shipp Young Boer, nor knoweth any thing touching the goods now in question
who are the Owners thereof or when or where or for whose Accompt or by whom
the same were laden, but saith he hath knowne the foresayd Claymers there[of]
about 12 yeares, and farther saving his foregooing deposes as cannot 
depose, saving that the sayd John Hawkes his howse is in the Laugh street of Revell

To the .6. he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Hamburgh and
otherwise negatively
To the .7. 8. 9. 10. 11.12. 13. 14 and 15 Interrogatories He saith he knoweth not[hing]
thereof

Jacob Wigandie [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Dr Clarke
and Dr Godolphin
----
The 5th day of November 1653
Examined Upon the said allegation ./

Thomas Coulscott against Lynes et cetera)
4

George Andrewes of St Katherine in the County of Mid[dlesex]
Scrivener aged 56 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first and the rest of the Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith That about 2 or 3 dayes next after the proceedings of this Court
were stayed this last summer by an Order of the Councell of State (the ??
otherwise for the present he remembreth not) He this deponent [??wgilXXX]
through
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.30r Annotate
through Ratcliffe was called or spoken to by a maid servant of the arlate
Captaine Lynes to come and speake with her master att his house, whither
being come the sayd Captaine Lynes entred upon a discourse with this deponent
touching this suit depending in the Court betwixt the arlate Thomas
Coulscott brother and Administrator of John Coulscut or Coulson deceased late
one of the Mariners of the Sampson arlate in her late voyage in question
to the Brasile, and him the sayd Captaine Lynes later Commander of the sayd
shipp the voyage in question, And then and there the sayd Captaine Lynes did
amongst other things acknowledge and confesse to him this deponent
that the sayd John Coulson or Coulscott was one of the Mariners of his sayd shipp
Sampson the voyage in question, and that his wages were still due for his
service aboard the sayd shipp during all the voygae till he was taken into the
Portugueses ymployment att Brasilia, and that the sayd John Coulson or
Coulscott had in his life tiyme delivered into the Custody of him the sayd Lynes
a Chest of sugars, which sugars, sayd he, God forbidd
that I should deprive the true Owner of, and as for the sayd wages I am
willing to pay the same in such sort as the Judges of the Admiralty have
ordered me to pay the rest of the Mariners their wages, provided that
there were any person to receyve the same that could give him a sufficient
discharge in Law or words to the same effect. And the same in effect
the sayd Captaine Lynes hath severall tyme sithence acknowledged and confessed
in the presence and hearing of him this deponent, whom he hath att such
tymes desired to be assisting for a freindly and fair composure of this
suit betwixt him the sayd Captaine Lynes and the plaintiffe Thomas Couldscott
aforesayd. And further he cannot depose, saving that since the foresayd
discourse att Captaine Lynes his howse as aforesayd, he the sayd Captaine Lynes
hath acknowledged and confessed to him this deponent that the sayd
Chest of sugars was of about 18. aroves.

Repeated before doctors Clarke and Godolphin./

George Andrewes [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 9th day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers et cetera against the Lewis)

Examined upon the said allegation

5

Robert Masters of Guernsy Mariner aged one and
forty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

Row dt.

To the first article of the sayd allegation he saith he beleiveth it to be notorious
that the Captaines of the shipps of warr employed in the service of this
Commonwealth are authorized to seize all shipps belonging to the States
of the united Provinces ffrench King or their subiects, and lading
of such shipps for reparation of dammages done to this Commonwealth by the
sayd Nations. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2. 3. and 4. articles of the sayd allegation he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .5 article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by the knowledge
skill and experience which he this deponent hath and for many yeares
hath had in Mapps Seacharts and globes he assuredly knoweth that the
way and course from Greeenland to Rochell in ffrance is by the north of
Ireland and not through the English Channell nor neere or by the
Texall or Holygolandt or by or neere those seas, and saith It is very
evident
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.30v Annotate
evident and easily demonstrable that It is a neerer passage by the
North of Ireland from Greenland to Rochell than by the Texell
or Holygolandt by neere 150 leagues. And for this cause this deponent
for his part beleiveth that the Greenland ffleet of ffrance doe usually
and commpnly make their course both outward and homeward by the
North of Ireland and not by the Holygolandt or Texell, and that
the same Pilotts who guide and pilott them out may and doe goe
and pilott them home againe. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 6. 7. and 8. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause att the Request
of Captaine Jacob Reynolds who as he heard tooke the shipp Lewis and
further otherwise than negatively he cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith he useth noe endeavour to procure the Lewise [?Hanter
or eyther of them or eyther of their lading to be condemned prize.
and further cannot depose.

Roboert Mester [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Godolphin)
and Doctor Clarke)
----
The tenth day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Captaine Isaac Philips against the Vessell)
called the Leopard of which Michael vander
Kerkhoven was master and her tackle and)
furniture, and Daniell Thyson comeing in)
for his interest. Smith Suckley.)

Examined upon an allegation made and
admitted in the Acts of Court on the behalfe
of the sayd Daniell Thyson.

1.

Michael vander Kerkhoven of Ostend in
fflanders mariner Master of the sayd shipp
the Leopard aged 33 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

That he this deponent about .4. monethes now past came from Ostend by
the order and direction of the allate Daniel Thyson to Dover purposing
to take possession of the sayd shipp the Leopard as Master of her which as the sayd Thyson
acquainted this deponent he had by his correspondent Mr Arnold
Beake of this Citty merchant caused to be bought for his the sayd
Thysons use. And saith that since his comeing to Dover he hath there heard
that the sayd shipp the Leopard was formerly called and knowne by the
name of the Blackbusse, and that it was a prize shipp and was bought
of and from the SubCommissioners of prize goods att Dover by Thomas
Dawke allegat, who have made him a bill of sale for the same which
this deponent hath seene; And that the sayd Thomas Dawkes did transfer
the propriety of the same to the sayd Daniel Thyson by vertue of a bill of
sale of the same made to his Contest Joris Johnson but in trust or
to the use of the sayd Daniel Thyson which bill of sale this deponent
hath likewise seene:. And moreover saith That in or about the moneth
of August last past he this deponent after his arrivall att Dover
tooke possession of the sayd shipp as Master of her in the name and [?XX]
and on the behalfe and by the e order of the sayd Daniel Thyson [?XX]
there videlicet att Dover continued in like possession thereof quietly and
peaceably severall weekes, andupon or about the second day of
October last past sett out to sea with the sayd shipp and meeting [?with]
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.31r Annotate
Contrary wind, and being upon a course back againe to Dover which
was the port from whence she came, She the sayd shipp Leopard formerly called
the Blackbusse was mett withall by a private Caper belonging
to Captaine Phillips aforesayd commannded by one Evrington who upon
sight of this deponent after he was brought aboard his shipp of warr
dismissed this deponent and the sayd shipp Leopard well knoweing and
accordingly declareing that the Leopard was a free shipp, and accordingly
the sayd shipp Leopard came and arrived att Dover her selfe, on or about the 4th
day of October last past. And saith that after the sayd shipp Leopard had
layne quietly in this deponents possession in the Piere of Dover about 7 or
8 dayes longer and was now  ready to sett sayle the second tyme she
was stayed and hindred from proceeding on her voyage by Mr De Laval
allegat. And saith that since the sayd shipp was so sold by the sayd Commissioners
for prize goods she never was att any Port but Dover nor ever out att sea
saveing as aforesayd upon the 2. 3. and 4th dayes of October, which he knoweth
for the reasons aforesayd: And further saith that the sayd Daniel Thyson
of the certaine knowledge of this deponent for about theis three yeares now past
hath bene and now is an Inhabitant and Burgher of Ostend and hath
for all the sayd tyme had his wife and Children and family there and
so hath att present, and was and is a subiect of the King of Spaine and
for and as such commonly accounted reputed and taken, which this deponent
well knoweth being a Burgher and Inhabitant of the same place
and well and very familiarly acquainted with him the sayd Daniel
Thyson. And further cannot depose.

[?mycheXX] vander [?berekhon] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Joris Johnson of Ostend Mariner steersman of
the sayd shipp the Leopard aged 48. yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

That in May or about the beginning of June last past He this deponent was imployed
and sent over from Ostend by the allegat Daniel Thyson for the buying
of a shipp att this Port of London for him the sayd Thyson with order
for that purpose to apply himselfe to the allegat Mr Arnold Beake
and saith that finding not any convenient shipp here by the order of
the sayd Arnold Beake he this deponent went to Dover and there
by the assistance of Michael de Haze allegat to whom he had
recommendation by the sayd Beake, bought the sayd shipp the Leopard
of and from the allegat Thomas Dawkes for about 360 pounds sterling
and accordingly the sayd Dawkes made a bill of sale of the same to
this deponent, but in trust and for the use of the sayd Daniel Thyson.
And saith that the sayd moneyes was furnished and payd to the sayd Dawkes
by the foresayd Arnold Beake or by order for part whereof the sayd Beake hath
bene satisfyed  by the sayd Thyson in Hempe and other goods, and
the remaynder the sayd Thyson and sayd shipp remaine still lyable
to satisfy and make good; And this deponent for the more and better
security of the moneyes to the sayd Beake, did make a Bill of
sale of the sayd shipp to him the sayd Arnold Beake. And further saith that
the sayd shipp was formerly called the Black busse and was and is
one
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.31v Annotate
one and the same shipp uner the sayd severall names of the [?Child]
and Leopard successively, and that the same formerly was as hee
hath credibly heard and beleiveth a prize shipp, and sold by the
subcommissioners for prize goods at Dover to the foresayd Thomas
Dawkes, of whom this deponent bought the same for the use of
Daniel Thyson and by his order in maner before sett forth. And
this deponent hath likewise credibly heard that the sayd sub Commissioners
have made a Bill of Sale of the same to the sayd Dawkes, And this
deponent further saith that upon the second day of October last past
the sayd shipp sett sayle from Dover under the Command of this [?XXX]
Michael van Kerkhaven, and that meeting with a Crosse winde
and being upon her returne for Dover was the 4th of October last mett withall by one
Captaine Phillips his Capers, and that the sayd shipp Leopard being
well knowne to be a free shipp ws dismist by the sayd Caper and
came into Dover alone, and that after 7 or 8 dayes stay att Dover
without ant molestation, or so much as a waiter aboard being ready
to sett sayle the second tyme the sayd shipp was stayed and hindered
in her voyage and designe by the allegat Mr Delavall. And saith
that from the tyme the sayd shipp Leopard formerly called the
Blackbusse was sould to Thomas Dawkes by the sayd Commissioners
she never sett out to sea till the 2nd of October aforesayd, now hath
bene att any other port since her such being sould but Dover only
And this deponent moreover saith that the sayd Daniel Thyson [?XX]
about 2 or 3 yeares last past of the certaine knowledge of this deponent
hath bene and now is an Inhabitant and Burgher of Ostend [?and]
during the sayd tyme he hath lived and still doth live with his
wife children and family and hath bene and is a subiect of the
King of Spaine, and so accounted, which this deponent knoweth
being well acquainted with him the saud Daniel Thyson, and being
himselfe a Burgher of Ostend, and present att and in the Towne Hall
of Ostend att the tyme the sayd Daniel Thyson was solemnly admitted
a Burgher of that Citty by the Magistrates there, which he
saith is upwards of 2 yeares and neere or about 3 yeares nowe
past. And further or therwise he saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. Interrogatorie he sayeth he hath neyther part share or interest in the sayd
shipp the Leopard, nor any part thereof, nor will it be any benefit to him
in case she be cleared or preiudice in case condemned.

To the .2. he saith he is steersman of the Leopard, and hath bene from her
first buying by Daniel Thyson in manner as aforesayyd videlicet from June last past and was designed soe to
be before she was bought, by the sayd Thyson being sent by him from Ostend
to buy a shipp in England as aforesayd, and tooke first Charge of her in
Dover being there in the nature of a master till his sayd Contest came [?out]
to take charge of her, And from the tyme the sayd Kerkhoven came to be
master the sayd shippe was and still is designed for Biskay. and otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he knoweth the interrate Daniel Thyson and so hath done for
12 yeares of thereabouts; and saith he is by parentage an Ostender, but  by
birth as he hath heard a Zealander, and saith the sayd Thyson is not
Subiect
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.32r Annotate
subiect of the States of the United Provinces, but was formerly, and
was about 3 or 4 yeares now past utterly bannished out of all the Territories
of the sayd States and deprived of all benefitts and priviledges of a
subiect, this Rendent being present and hearing his sayd banishment to the
effects aforesayd openly proclaymed by authority of the sayd [?Statalm] att
Middleburgh fflushing and Camphire; and saith he was so banished
for some offence in a busines of Ensurance but what in particular he
knoweth not. and saith his wife Children and family are with him att Ostend
and not in Holland Zealand or any place in eyther of them.

To the 4th he saith the sayd shipp is of an hollands mold of building. but
who built her or where or att whose charge she was built he knoweth not.

To the .5. he saith he was present att the buying of the sayd shipp, and was sent
by Daniel Thyson to buy a shipp att large as aforesayd, and was directed by
the sayd Arnold Beake to Dover as aforesayd, and there the sayd shipp
was bought by this deponent and Michael de Haze aforesayd to whom
Mr Beake did send a letter or note in that behalfe for the use and Accompt
of the sayd Daniel Thyson, and the sayd note or letter was written in London
about the month of June last past. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .6. he saith he knoweth the interrate Tysen of Campliere the brother
of Daniel Thyson aforesayd; and the sayd brothers were sometymes videlicet before
the banishment of Daniel as aforesayd, partners in trad, but not since
and the sayd shipp was bought for the sole Accompt of the sayd Daniel
and otherwise negatively.

To the .7. he saith the sayd Daniel Thyson is a merchant and Burgher
of Ostend and there lives in the quality of a Burgher and is owner
of 2 good shipps, and a man well able to buy such a shipp as the
Leopard. and further referring himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
he cannot depose.

To the .8. he saith there were aboard the sayd shipp the tyme interrate
a bill of sale of the sayd shipp from Thomas Dawkins. a sea breife and
Letters Commendatory from the Governor of Ostend, which are now in the
hands of the sayd Kerkhoven as he beleiveth. and further he saith
he cannot depose.

To the nynth he saith he did not see the moneyes payd for the sayd
shipp, but hath heard the foresayd Dawkes acknowledge that he ws
fully satisfyed, his moneyes according to the contract above mentioned.
And otherwise cannot depose.

[?Joris ?Jansen] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 11th day of November .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The foresayd Michael vander Kerkhoven to the Crosse
Interrogatories.

To the 1 he asith he hath noe part in the sayd shipp nor shall receyve profit or
losse by her clearing or condeminge.

To the 2. he saith he is master of the sayd shipp, and ca,e first aboard her
att Dover in August last, and was appoynted master of her by the said
Daniel Thyson. and the sayd shipp was designed for a voyage to Biskay
before this deponent came from Ostend. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith he knoweth Daniel Thyson, and so hath done 3 yeares or
thereabouts, and this Rendent hath heard he was borne in Zeland, and
hath bene absent from there about 3 yeares and is not a subiect of the
States
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.32v Annotate
States of the united Provinces but of the King of Spaine, as aforesayd
being bannisht out of the Territories of the sayd Provinces as this
Rendent hath heard but for what cause knoweth not, and further saving his
forefoeing depositions he cannot depose

To the 4th he saith the sayd shipp Leopard is of a hollands make but where
it was made or by whom he knoweth not nor for whose use.

To the .5. he saith he was not present when the sayd shipp was bought
and otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose

To the .6. he saith he knoweth one Leonard Thyson of Compla[?ire] whom
he taketh to be the producents brother. and otherwise negatively for
his part.

To the .7. he saith the sayd daniell Thson is a burgher of Ostend, and
a merchant of good reputation/ and for and as such comminly
accounted att Ostend./ and otherwise or further cannot depose.

To the 8. he saith there were aboard the sayd shipp the tyme interrate
this deponents Commission for Master a sea briefe from the Governour of Ostend
and a passe port from Osetnd, and the foresayd deed of sale made by
Thomas daw[?les] aforesayd, and were all of them till of late in this Rendents
owne possession videlicet till he delivered them to Mr Suckley one of the
proctors of this Court in whose hands they now are. and otherwise
negatively for his part.

To the nyneth he saith hee saw not any moneyes paid for the sayd
shipp. and further referring to his foregeoing depositions hee
cannot depose./

mijoXiez vandez her[XXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his
precontest before the
Judges in Court
----
The third day of december 1653

The Keepers etcetera against the ffortune,
etcetera

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

II

Josiah Ricroft of Broadstreet London merchant
aged 35 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the nynth Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith for their
th?ree yeares last past he hath frequently attended and bene present
att the publiq sales by the Candle of prize goods made by the Commissioners
for prize goods, and hath bought severall parcells of goods him selfe
and hath observed that prize goods which have bene sold by the
sayd Comissioners att the Candle have generally bene sold att as great
a price as merchants usually sell their goods of the same sort and quality
in their ware howses, and that some goods have bene sold by the sayd
Comissioners by the Candle to a farr greater value than they have bene worth XX
and that the buyers have lost considerable summes of moneyes by
many parcells of prize goods soe bought, and so much the deponent
himselfe hath had experience of to his owne losse, and hath heard
severall other merchants make Complaint thereof to the same effect.
And otherwise cannot depose.

Upon the rest he is not examined by direction.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th Interrogatoryes he saith he cannot depose otherwise than negatively.

'J R'

Josiah Ricroft [SIGNATURE, LH VERTICAL MARGIN]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.33r Annotate
The seaventh day of October 1653.

The clayme of John Bodkin of Gallaway)
in Ireland for his moneyes and sylver laden on board)
the shipp the Saint Peter (whereof Cornelius Jacobson)
[GUTTER XXXX] was master) taken and surprized by the shipp)
the Handmaid whereof Charles Wills was then)
Captaine  Smith ffrancklin)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd John Bodkyn.

1.

Thomas Martin of Gallaway in Ireland merchant aged
five and twenty yeares a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ffrank?l] dt

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in the monethes of June and July 1653 and continually since the arlate
John Bodkin was and is the Lawfull Owner and proprietor of the arlate
five hundred peices of eight of Mexico and Sevill conteyned in two bag?s
marked and numbred as in the margent [IB n:° 3. 4.] and so accounted, which he knoweth
for that he saw a letter at Bilboa from the sayd Bodkin att Nantes
directed to ffrancis Bodkins att Bilboa, ordering him to procure the
like summe of moneyes, and this deponent knoweth that the sayd ffrancis
Bodkins bought and procured the same accordingly And this deponent
saw the sayd money and counted and assisted at the telling and
bagging up the same, and saw the same marked as aforesayd, and
afterwards saw bills of lading signed for the same for the sayd producent
Accompt. and othewise saving his following deposiccons cannot depose
and saving that the sayd moneyes are the proceed of the producents goods Tobacco and [?hides] as he beleiveth

To the second third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation and to the bill of
lading therein mentioned this deponent saith hee saw at Bilboa the sayd
ffrancis Bodkin deliver the sayd baggs of money marked as aforesayd
to Cornelius Jacobson [?Sept] master of the Saint Peter arlate and heard him
give directions to the sayd ?Sept to carry the same aboard the sayd shipp
for the Accompt of John Bodkin to be in the sayd shipp transported
from Bilboa where the sayd shipp then lay to Nantes in ffrance and there
to be delivered to the sayd John Bodkin or his assignes for his use and
Accompt, and the sayd deponent went to carry the same aboard accordingly
and this deponent did afterwards see the same aboard the sayd shipp
And saith that after the lading of the sayd moneyes videlicet upon or about
the 26th day of June 1653. last past this deponent at Bilboa saw the
arlate Cornelius Jacobson [?Sept] signe three bills of lading for the
same all of one tenor, and saith the bill of lading exhibited for the
same remaining in the Registry of this Court and now shewne to him
this Examinat was and is one of the sayd bills of lading for the sayd
500 peices of 8 which this deponent saw signed forthe same as aforesayd
And the contracts thereof he saith were and are true and reall and not
false or colourable, which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth seventh and eighth articles of the sayd allegation this deponent
saith that the sayd ffrancis Bodkin is an Irishman and was at Bilboa
a merchant stranger and was and is the correspondent and factor of the
producent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.33v Annotate
producent and so accounted which this deponent knoweth being his
Acquiantance and correspondent. And saith hee saw the sayd ffrancis
Bodkin att Bilboa soone after the lading of the sayd moneyes wrote
signe and direct a letter to the sayd John Bodkins att Nantes
touching the sayd moneyes the particular contents of which letter
hee now remembreth not. And saith he is fully persuaded and well
assured that noe Subiect of the States of the united provinces King
of ffrance or any Prince or State in hostility with this Commonwealth
had or hath any share or interest in the sayd moneyes or any part thereof
And saith he never heard that the sayd ffrancis Bodkin was or is
a subiect of any such Prince or State, or of the States of the sayd
united Provinces or King of ffrance, but beleiveth he is a subiect of
the Commonwealth, and so ought to be and is accomted. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
after the lading of the sayd moneyes as aforesd the sayd shipp Saint Peter
departed therewith from Bilboa and in her Course thither was seized
by Captaine Wills and Company, in the shipp Handmaid, And the sayd
moneyes now claymed were then aboard the sayd shipp and came into
the hands and possession of the sayd Wills and Company. the premisses
he knoweth to be true being aboard the sayd shipp as a passenger
att the tyme of the sayd seizure. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith tht the arlate
John Bodkin was and is an Irishman borne and so accounted and
in June last and for many years before and since the sayd tyme was
and is an Inhabitant of Galloway in Ireland and hath his wife children
and family there, and was and is a subiect of this Commonwealth
living under the protection thereof and so accounted, and never was
or is a subiect of the States of the united Provinces or of the King
of ffrance or of any Prince or State in hostility with this Commonwealth
that this deponent knoweth or ever heard. the premisses this deponent
knoweth being himselfe of Galloway and by his Correspondencyes
he holdath there. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 11th hee saith his depositions are true

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

Smith dt.

To the 1. he saith he comes to be a witnes att the Request of Daniel Arthur
and hath knowne the producent from his Childhood. and otherwise negatively

To the 2. he saith he is an Irishman, and is not bound as he beleiveth to
discover his conscience in poynt of Religion, and is a Merchant factor
without a settled aboad, and from the yeare 1642. to 1646. lived in
fflanders. from 1646. to 1652 in the beginning thereof lived in Holland
and Zealand. and from April 1652. to July 1653 in Spain, from
whence he came in July last and in the same month arrived in London, and
here hath resided ever since. And otherwise negatively.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.34r Annotate
To the third hee saith John Bodkin hath his habitation in Gallaway and there was
borne and hath lived from his Childhood. and hath his wife and family there
and otherwise negatively saving he beleiveth he was att Nantes upon
his merchandizing affaires about June last

To the .4. negatively to every part thereof.

To the .5: and 6. he saith he saw the bills of lading interrate signed as aforesayd
a shoare. and knoweth the bill of lading now showne him to be one of the
very originall bills as aforesayd by the markes firme and contents thereof
and by the handwriting of ffrancis Bodkins servant by which it was and
is filled up. and otherwise being not aboard att the tyme of Lading
referring himselfe to his foregoeinging depositions wherein he hath set forth
all his knowledge in the particulars touching the sayd moneyes and lading
thereof he cannot depose.

To the .7. he saith he came along in the sayd shipp and had aboard for his owne
Accompt. 1600. pieces of 8/8 and 361/2 pieces of 8/8 and 75 pieces of 8/8 and gold to the value of 1471/2 in
pieces of 8/8 one bag of ambergreese worth 212. ps of 8/8 1/2 and 311
kintalls (sic) of Spanish Iron. and otherwise negatively.

To the 8. hee refereth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and further
cannot depose.

To the 9. he saith he hath lived in Holland and Zealand as he hath above
declared. and hath noe intent to returne thither nor had any such purpose
att the tyme of the seizure of the Peter nor hath any howse there
or elsewhere saving in Galloway as hayre apparent to his father

To the.10. hee saith he knoweth not of any ensurance upon the money in
question or any part thereof. nor that the producent did or doth use to [?hold]
any other persons goods under his owne name.

To the .11. he saith that hee this deponent did about 2 dayes after the arrivall
of the Saint Peter att ffoy in his owne Lodgings there deliver to Captaine
Wills interrate severall bills of Lading and papers. and otherwise
negatively.

To the 12, he saith he saw the lettere interrate at Bilbao about the latter end of
June last past in the hands of the sayd ffrancis Bodkin. and beleiveth
the contents of the sayd letter were true, and that the same is come into
the possession of Captaine Wills. and otherwise saving his foregoing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the .13. he saith hee saw severall goods of a good value in the hands
of the sayd ffrancis Bodkin which were sent to him by the producent
about the month of May or April last in an English vessell whereof
one [Dun?ton] was Master from the port of Nantes in ffrance. and
John Bodkin by bills of lading and letters which hee saw in Bilboa
for and touching the same, and saith the sayd Goods were Tobacco and hides.

To the .14. he saith he hath knowne ffrancis Bodkin in the bills of lading
mentioned from a Child, and he now resides in Bilbao and so hath done
for theis 6 yeares or thereabouts, and before att Gallaway from his childhood
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.34v Annotate
And saith he is a factor for English and Irish merchants and not for
ffrench or dutch merchants so far as this deponent knoweth or hath heard. And
otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the .15. he saith the sayd shipp Saint Peter was att the tyme of her seizure in
the possession of dutch men subiects of of the States of the united Provinces
and her Company were most of them subiects of the sayd States. and she
and her lading would have gone to Nantes in ffrance if they had not beene
surprized as aforesd.

To the .16. he saith Daniell Archer did informe this Rendent that the producent
had sent him order to clayme the moneyes now in question, and this Rendent
beleiveth it to be true that the sayd Mr Archer hath such order. and
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 17. he saith the sayd Daniel Archer is an Irishman and noe ffrenchman
nor subiect of the ffrench King, and as this Rendent hath heard hath
bene about a yeare and an halfe in England, and was in ffrance about
6 yeares agoe, but when hee came last from thence this Rendent knoweth
not. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Reoeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin

Thomas Martin [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The eighth day of October 1653

The Clayme of Joseph Markes and John)
Baptista Margarita and others merchants)
of Spayne and subiects of the King of)
Spayne for their goods lately laden on att)
the Island of Palma in the Canaries)
and Cast on shoare in the shipp the)
ffortune whereof Phillip Duncar was Master upon the Coast of Cornwall.)
Smith Budd)

Examined upon an allegation upon the behalfe
of the sayd Claymes

Philip Duncar of Antwerpe in
Brabant Mariner Captaine or Commander
of the sayd shipp the ffortune, aged
four and twenty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in the monthes of June July August and September last past and
before and since hee this deponent was and ought to be the true
and law full Owner of the sayd shipp the ffortune the tackle and
furniture, and was in the sayd tyme master and Commander of
her, and saith he bought the sayd shipp for ready moneyes about
a yeare agoe att Hamburgh. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in or about the month of August 1653 last past the sayd shipp the ffortune
was and remayned att or neere the Island of Palma, and during her
abode there the arlate Joseph Markes, John Baptista Mogarita
and Company all Spanish merchants and subiects of the King of
Spayne
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.35r Annotate
Spaine did Lade and putt on board the sayd shipp three thousand and
seven hundred hides or thereabouts, one large barr of sylver the certayne
value whereof he knoweth not, and a good quantity of moneyes in peices
of 8/8 but how much in certaine he knoweth not, four barrells of Spanish
Tabacco, a great quantity of dry ginger loose and about four barrells and
one Potaco more of Varinaes Tobacco, and forty Ratacos more of
varinases tabaccoes, thirteen pipes of sugar or thereabouts, eighteene
baggs of ginger, a great quantity of Brazil and Camp[?o]cha wood
all for the proper use and Accompt of the sayd Joseph Markes John
Baptista Mograita and other merchants of Spayne subiects of the King
of Spaine to be transported in the sayd shipp to Dunquerke for their use
And saith the sayd merchants att the tyme of lading the sayd goods
were and are owners and proprietors of the sayd goods, the premisses he
knoweth being master of the sayd shipp and receyved the sayd goods aboard
and signed bills of Lading for the same to and for the Accompt aforesayd
And otherwise he cannot depose saving that he saith al or most of the
sayd sugar and ginger is lost and spoyled, and that there were laden
aboard the sayd shipp for the Accompt aforesd severall barrells of Tortle shells
and saving that one thousand two hundred and ten of the forementioned hides
were laden for the Accompt of P[?etio] Sararma a merchant of Sevile:

To the third he saith that in the sayd yeare and moneth of August last past the
sayd shipp the ffortune having all and singular the sylver moneyes and goods
aforesayd aboard her sett sayle therewith towards Dunkirke whither she
was bound and in her Course thither upon or about the first day of September
last past the sayd shipp neere unto a place called Ramhead upon the
Coast of Cornwall mett with and exceeding great Storme and tempest
and in the same was cast away. And saith that this deponent and
the Mariners of her Company were saved and came safe on shoare upon
the Coast of Cornwall, or neere thereabouts. And otherwise cannot
depose, saving that the merchants passengers were alll likewise saved two only excepted.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the Casting
away of the sayd shipp the ffortune and her lading aforesayd a great
part of the sayd lading of hides Tobacco wood money and plate came
safe on shoare and was saved and preserved, and not left, and was
and is now in the power and possession of the vice Admiralls deputy
of Devon and Cornwall or other officer of the sayd Vice admirall.
And saith he hath seene severall of the sayd hides and Tobacco in
the possession of Stephen Trovill the vice Admiralls deputy aforesd
and knoweth they are the same which were laden aboard, and cast
away in the sayd shipp as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he this deponent
was and is a fflandrian borne and a subiect of the King of Spayne.
And the sayd Joseph Markes and John Baptista Mogaritta and the
sayd Pedro Soramo and Company the Owners of the sayd goods money
and plate were and are all Spaniards borne and subiects of the King
of Spaine and for and such Commonly Accompted, reputed and taken and
otherwise cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.35v Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1 he saith he was master and Owner of the sayd shipp the ffortune
and was in her and continued in her all the voyage to the tyme that she
was cast away. And saith the sayd shipp was not first sett out or began
the voyage from Amsterdam, Middleburg or any other Port within the
Jurisdiction of the States of the united Provinces. And saith the sayd
shipp was not to have returned to any of the sayd Ports nor there have
ordered her voyage, but att Dunkirke as he hath before declared. And
saith the sayd shipp began her outward voyage from Dunkirke and
this Rendent was master of her all the sayd voyage.

To the 2 he saith the sayd shipp begann her outward voyage about
the month of May last past and saith she was lett out to fraight by
Charter partie to Juan de Valletta a Spanish merchant of Dunkirke in her
sayd outward voyage, and her lading was linnens and peice goods of
fflanders the greatest part for the Accompt of this Rendent and part for the
Accompt of the sayd Juan de Valetta and Company, and saith the
sayd goods were sold in the Isle of Palma by the sayd Juan da Vallettas brother [XXXXX] da Valletta
who hath a good share in the goods now in question; and by this
deponent who had the proceed thereof in Sugars aboard the sayd
shipp ffortune which sugars are spoyled and lost; and twenty three
pata?toes of Tobacco some whereof are preserved. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the 3d he saith that the sayd Joseph Markes was himselfe in the
Isle of Palma as also John Sallazar Pedro Saranno Diego da
Valetta, Antonio Regl[?os] Don Juan da Monteverte whio are the
principall Owners of the goods now in question, and the sayd
persons did lade the sayd goods by themselves, and most of them
by report brought the same from the Indies, and this Rendent
saith the sayd goods in their possession before the lading thereof
in the sayd Isle of Palma, for which reasons and for that they
did lade upon the same for the Accompt aforesayd he verily beleiveth
that the sayd Spanish merchants were and are proprietors of the goods
aforesayd: And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4. he saith there were bills of Lading aboard the sayd shipp for
the merchants goods, and some papers relating to the same, but
whether any of them be [XX] and saved or noe, or where any of
them be he knoweth not.

To the .5. he saith he doth not know or is convinced or beleiveth in his
conscience that the goods now Claymed in the name of the sayd Joseph
Markes and others or any part thereof doth belong to any dutchman or
dutchmen subiects of the States of the united Provinces or to any
ffrenchman or ffrenchmen subiects of the ffrench King. And
otherwise cannot depose

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Felipe Dunker [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
c [XXXXXXXXXX]

----

The same day. Examined upon the sayd allegation

2.

Juan Gomez Brito of the Isle of Palma merchant
aged forty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.36r Annotate
To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the monthes
of August and September 1653 last past the arlate Phillip Dunker
was master or Captaine of the sayd shipp the ffortune, and was accounted
the Owner thereof and of her tackle and furniture, which this deponent
knoweth comeing as a passenger aboard the sayd shipp. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth
of August last past the arlate Joseph Markes and John Baptista
Magheritta (sic) and others all Spanish merchants and subiects of the King of Spaine did for their
owne Accompt lade aboard the sayd shipp the ffortune then lyeing att
or neere Palma arlate three thousand hides or thereabouts, one
barr of sylver of the weight of eight hundred peices of 8/8 or
thereabouts, and about one thousand peices of eight in moneyes
about seven or eight barrells of Tobacco, and about fifty Potaccoes
all Spanish Tobacco, and about 2 barrells of Tortle shells three Church Bells and some wood for dying and allso
severall good quantityes of Ginger and sugars, most of which sugars
and ginger were lost in the shipwreck, to be transported to Dunkirke
and there to be delivered to the sayd merchants or their Agents for
their use and Accompt. And saith att the tyme of Lading the sayd
goods sylver and moneyes the aforesd merchants that did lade the
same were the true and lawfull owners thereof, and still are of
the sayd sylver and moneyes and somuch of the sayd goods as is not
destroyed by the sayd shipwrack, the premisses this deponent knoweth
being present att the Lading of all the sayd goods sylver and moneyes
and knoweth that the sayd Spanish merchants were in the quiet and
peaceable possession of the same as and for their owne goods before
the lading thereof, and knoweth that they did lade the same for
their owne Accompt to be transported as aforesd. And otherwise cannot [depose]

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd shipp
being laden as aforesayd in the month of August last past sett sayle
from the Isle of Palma and in her course towards Ostend were about
a league from Plymouth mett with a violent tempest about the
sixth day of September last past and in the same was cast away
and the master of her and all her cCompany and passengers aboard
three psons onely excepted were saved and came safe to shoare about
a league from Plymouth the place otherwise he knoweth not And
saith he knoweth the p:rmisses being a passenger aboard the sayd shipp
the voyage in question and aboard her when the sayd wrack hapned. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that many
of the sayd goods and merchandizes and particularly a great number
of the sayd hides and a good quantity of the sayd Tobaccos of the
sight of this deponent came to shoare and were preserved; And he
saith he hath heard Mr Trevill deputy of the Vice Admiralty there say
that himself had some of the sayd goods in his possession, And heard
likewise some of the English that came to the Strand upon the sayd
wrack say that they had found some baggs of peices of 8/8. And otherwise
cannot depose, saveing he hath heard two of the sayd bells came safe to shoare
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.36v Annotate
And saith the sayd goods so brought to shoare into the possession of the
sayd Vice Admiralls officers and ministers were and are the very same
goods Laden as aforesd att Palma for the Accompt of the aforesayd
merchants Spaniards, and not diverse and hath heard that severall
quantityes of the sayd moneyes were taken up by the people a shoare, and that the
aforesayd bells came safe to shoare. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd Phillip
Dunker is a fflandrian borne an Inhabitant of Antwerpe and subiect
of the Kinge of Spaine and so accounted, And the sayd Joseph Markes
John Baptista Magheritta and others the owners of the aforesayd goods
moneyes sylver and lading are all of them Spaniards and subiects
of the King of Spaine and so accounted, the aforesayd Dunker
excepted who is a fflandrian as a foresayd and had a good adventure
aboard the sayd shipp in sugars, all or most whereof is lost, and
some few Potacoes of Tobacco which are preserved as he beleiveth.
And further he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first he saith he was a passenger aboard the sayd shipp and
was in her and continued in her all the voyage to the tyme that she was
cast away. And saith the sayd shipp as hee hath heard began her voyage
from Dunkirke, and he knoweth she was to have returned thither and
there have ende her voyage. And otherwise negatively.

To the 2d he saith he cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith he hath allready specified the merchants owners of the
sayd goods sylver and moneys, and saith he saw them all in the Isle
of Palma att the tyme of lading the sayd money sylver and goods
And saith he knoweth that the aforesayd goods sylver and moneyes
were and are the goods of the sayd Spaniards and subiects of the King
of Spaine, for that the sayd sylver moneyes hides Tobaccoos ginger and Tortle shells
were by the sayd merchants bought in the Indies where none but Spaniards
doe usually trade, and this Rendent himselfe bought and procured part
of them of severall Inhabitants of the sayd Indies, and knoweth
that the rest were there likewise bought and procured for the sayd
Accompt with the proceed of merchandises carryed thither by this
Rendent and others, And the same all came from the Indies to Palma
and a great part of them in the same shipp with the Rendant and
whereof himselfe had the goverment and the aforesayd Spanish merchants
came along from the Indies to Palma with their sayd goods and did
many of them come along with the same from Palma, and two of them
were cast away with the sayd shipp. And otherwise cannot depose saving
that the said bells belong to a Church in Palma, and were to be new cast and founded in fflanders:

To the fourth he saith there were aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme
she was cast away severall bills of lading for the sayd merchants
goods, some whereof came into the hands of the sayd Mr Travill.

To the fifth he saith the sayd goods money as sylver he knoweth doe
really belong to the subiects of the King of Spaine, as he hath
above declared, and otherwise negatively.

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[XXXXXXXX Gomes Britto] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. Examined upon the sayd  allegation.

3.

Juan de Sallazar of the Isle of Palma merchant
aged forty seven yeares or thereabouts a witness
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.37r Annotate
To the first and second Articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and
deposeth that in the monthes of August and September last past the
arlate Phillip Dunkar was master or Captaine of the sayd shipp the
ffortune, and was accounted the Owner thereof. And saith that the sayd
shipp the ffortune being att or neere the Isle of Palma the arlate
Jospeh Marks and Juan Baptista Magher[?tta], and Pedro Serrano, Juan
Salazar Diegodo Valetta, Juan Gomez [?BXXto] Antonio Riche, all
Spaniards, and subiects of the King of Spaine did putt and lade aboard
the sayd shipp about the beginning of August 1653 last past for
their owne Accompt and other Spaniards subiects of the King about
3500 hides. one barr of sylver of the weight of about 900. pieces of 8/8
about .1500. pieces of 6/6 in moneys. three Church bells, about .7. barrells of
Tobacco .60. potaces of Tobacco of varinas or thereabouts. one barrell
of tortle shells, and some dozens more of tortle shells. a small quantity
of Campecha and Brazil wood, and severall good quantityes of
ginger and sugars. to be transported in the sayd shipp to Dunkirke
and there to be delivered for the Accompt aforesayd. And saith that
the aforesayd Joseph Mark[?s] Jean Baptista Magherita and others
the Laders of the sayd goods sylver and moneyes att the tyme of lading
the same were the lawfull Owners thereof and so accounted, and saith
that some of the sayd goods are since lost and perished by shipwrack
and particularly the Sugar and ginger or most part thereof, and some
of the foresayd Owners were likewise cast away, to witt, Antonio [?Roshe]
and diago Valetta. And saith that the aforesayd Spaniards the
Laders of the sayd sylver goods and moneyes, so many of them as are
living and the heyres of them that are dead are now and ought to be
the lawfull Owners of the sayd sylver money and goods that remaine
unperished. the premisses he knoweth to be true having seene many
of the sayd goods bought, and all of them quietly possest, and laden
att Palma by the sayd Spaniards the Claymers thereof for the
Accompt aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third, and fourth articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the sayd shipp the ffortune having taken in her lading as aforesayd
in August last past sett sayle from Palma and in her Course for dunkirke
whither she stood bound about the sixth day of September last past neere the
Westerne coast of England not farr from Plymouth mett with a violent
storme wherein she was cast away, and part of her ladeing lost, the
sugars especially. And saith that the master of the sayd shipp and all
the mariners and all the Passenger, two excepted, were preserved
and gott to shoare, and this deponent amongest the rest. and saith
he saw a great part of the aforesayd lading preserved and brought safe
to shoare, and particularly the hides and Tobacco aforesayd or a great part
of them, and saw them in the possession of the Vice Admirall there, And
this deponent then saw likewise upon the Strand one Mr Trevill whom he
then understood to be the Vice Admiralties deputy of devon and Cornwall
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.37v Annotate
And saith the sayd goods so brought to shoare into the possession of the
sayd Vice Admiralls officers and ministers were and are the very same
goods laden as aforesayd att Palma for the Accompt of the aforesayd
merchants Spaniars, and not diverse. and hath heard that severall
quantityes of the sayd moneyes were taken upp by the people ashoare, and that the
aforesayd bells came safe to shoare. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd Phillip
Danker is a fflandrian borne an Inhabitant of Antwerpe and subiect
of the King of Spaine and so accounted, And the sayd Joseph Markes
John Baptista Magheritta and others the Owners of the aforesayd goods
moneyes sylver and lading are all of them Spaniards and subiects
of the King of Spaine and so accounted, the aforesayd Dunker
excepted who is a fflandrian as aforesayd and had a good adventure
aboard the sayd shipp in sugars, all or most whereof is lost, and
some few Potacoes of Tobacco which are preserved as he beleiveth
And further he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first he saith he was a Passenger aboard the sayd shipp and
was in her and continued in her all the voyage to the tyme that she was
cast away And saith the sayd shipp as he hath heard began her voyage
from dunkirke, and he knoweth she was to have returned thither and
there have ended her voyage. And otherwise negatively.

To the 2d he saith he cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith he hath allready specifyed the merchants owners of the
sayd goods sylver and moneys, and saith he saw them all in the Isle
of Palma att the tyme of lading the sayd money sylver and goods
And saith he knoweth that the aforesayd goods sylver and moneyes
were and are the foods of the said Spaniards and subiects of the King
of Spaine, for that the sayd sylver moneyes hides Tobaccoes ginger and Turtle shells
were by the sayd merchants bought in the Indies where none, but Spaniards
doe usually trade, and this Rendent himselfe bought and procured part
of them of severall Inhabitants of the sayd Indies and knoweth
that the rest were there likewise bought and procured for the sayd
Accompt with the proceed of erchandizes carryed thither by this
Rendent and others, And the same all came from the Indies to Palma
and a great part of them in the same shipp with this Rendent and,
whereof himselfe had the government and the aforesaid Spanish merchants
came along from the Indies to Palma with their sayd goods and did
many of them come along with the same from Palma, and two of them
were cast away with the sayd shipp. And otherwise cannot depose saving
that the said bells belong to a Church in Palma, and were to be new cast and founded in fflanders

To the fourth he saith there were aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme
she was cast away severall bills of lading for the sayd merchants
goods, some whereof came into the hands of the sayd Mr Trevill.

To the fifth he saith the sayd goods money as sylver he knoweth doe
really belong to the subiects of the King of Spaine, as he hath
above declared, and otherwise negatively.

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?JXXX] [?XXXXlasar] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.38r Annotate
The eleaventh day of October 1653. [ACENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Liberty of England by authority)
of Parliament, and allso William Mellvill, John [?Wallys])
Richard Tomlyns, Walter fflint, and Walter)
Radcliffe and others against a certaine shipp)
a vessell named the Supply whereof one)
Oakes is or late was master and her tackle and)
ffurniture and against all and every erson)
or persons that doe or shall appeare for their
Interest or Propriety in the same or any)
part thereof. Budd Suckly)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd Keepers of the Liberty of England
by authority of Parliament and of the sayd
William Mellvell. et cetera.

.1.

James Lashly of Shadwell in the County
of Middlesex Mariner master of the shipp
the Abraham aged 28 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as foloweth. videlicet.

Row dt.

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
a certaine shipp formerly called the Abrahams Sacrifice and now the
Abraham having bene seized to the use of this Commonwealth, was brought
to Judgment in this Court of Admiralty and with her tackle and furniture
condemned and adiudged as lawfull prize, this deponent being present
in Court when the sayd Sentence of condemnation was pronounced and for the
poynt of tyme referreth himselfe to the Acts of this Court. And saith
that by vertue of the sayd sentence the Keepers of the Liberty of England
became lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the sayd shipp, and her tackle
and furniture. And further saith that after the sayd condemnation and
on or about the 20th day of August last past 1653 the sayd shipp the
Abraham by the Order of the right honourable the Counsell of State was designed
for a voyage to be made with her to Saint Johnstons in Scotland and this deponent by
authority of the sayd Counsell was constituted and appoynted master of her
for the sayd voyage; and accordingly the sayd shipp was furnished, and
divers goods and merchandizes were laden on board her and particularly
there were laden on board her 300 Bedds for Souldiers with ruggs
sheets and furniture bought and provided by the Ministers and att the cost of this
Commonwealth and laden and receyved aboard the sayd shipp dry and well
conditioned to be carryed to the sayd Port of Saint Johnstons for the use of the
Souldiers of this Commonwealth. the premisses he knoweth being master
of the sayd shipp, and having receyved the sayd beds and furniture aboard
as aforesaid: And otherwise cannot depose./

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in the
month of September 1653 the arlate William Mellvill John Wallys
Richard Tomlyns Walter fflint and Walter Radcliffe and others were
lawfull Owners of severalll ffatts Chests Boxes Packes Bales ffardells
and other cases of sugars and severall goods and merchandises the particulars
whereof he knoweth not, All which they caused to be laden aboard the
sayd shipp the Abraham dry and well conditioned to be carryed to Leith in
Scotland, And the sayd goods were all on board the sayd shipp att the tyme
of the sinking of the same hereafter mentioned which he knoweth being
master of the sayd shipp and receyving the same aboard. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and
deposeth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.38v Annotate
deposeth that the sayd shipp the Abraham having the sayd bedds and
other the goods and merchandizes aforesayd aboard her and being ready
tp proceed upon the sayd voyage was on or about the 22th day of
September last past in the River of Thames within the ebbing and
floweing of the Sea, and within the Jurisdiction of this Court bilged
upon an Anchor by meanes whereof the sayd shipp Abraham and her
lading were sunke in the sayd River, And saith that the sayd Anchor
did then lye without any buoy to it. And saith that the sayd shipp
and her lading lay under water in the sayd River three dayes or
thereabouts before she could be weighed upp againe, And the sayd
bedds and furniture thereto belonging were and are thereby dammaged
to the value of 6 s. 8 d a peice att the least one with another, amounting
in the whole to the summe or value of 100 li. sterling and for a lesse summe
of moneyes the dammage done to the sayd bedds and furniture cannot
be fully satisfyed and made good, which he knoweth being att the taking
up of the sayd beds and furniture out of the ater and saw and observed
the dammage done to them, and the sayd shipp bilged by an anchor
having not any buoy to it as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp the Abraham by her bilging as aforesayd was dammaged in her
rigging to the value of 4 li. sterling and in her hawsers which were
broke 5 li sterling. and in her hull and weighing upp with her lading
forty pounds sterling. and in her ropes lost and spoyled three pouns
sterling. and there were likewise expended in the necessary Charge
of Lighters the summe of .4 li. sterling. over and besides the charge of
warehouses and men to looke to the sayd goods, which he certainly
knoweth, and the dammage done to the sayd goods as is above sett forth./
the premisses he knoweth having seene the aforesayd dammages done
and suffered, and seene a good part of the sayd summes dispursed and
expended for the reparation thereof. And otherwise cannot depose

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that of the sight
of this deponent the aforesayd goods wares and merchandises laden
as aforesayd by the sayd William Melvill John [?Wadys] Richard Tomlyn
Walter fflint Walter Radcliffe and others as aforesayd were much
wett and suffered great dammage, but how much in certayne not
knoweing the qualityes and kinds of the sayd goods he cannot sett forth.
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the eighth and nynth articles of the sayd Allegation this deponent saith
that of the sight and knowledge of this deponent all the aforesayd
dammages and losses did happen and were occasioned by reason of
the bilging of the sayd shipp the Abraham upon the Anchor aforesayd
And saith of his like sight and certaine knowledge the sayd anchor
upon which the sayd shipp was bilged, was an Anchor of the aforesayd
shipp the Supply whereof the arlate [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Oakes was and is master
and the sayd anchor did indeed belong to the sayd shipp, and was of
the sight of this deponent fastned to a Cable which did belong to the
sayd shipp the Supply and was of this deponents sight fastned thereto
And otherwise he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.39r Annotate
To the tenth he saith that of this deponents sight the sayd Anchor lay inm
a place in the River of Thames within the flowing and ebbing of the
water and where shipps doe sometimes passe. And saith of his like sight
and knowledge when the syd ship Abraham  was bilged as aforesaid the
sayd Anchor had noe Buoy or any other marke by which it might be discerned
that there was any Anchor in that place. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that by the
Sea laws and Customes and common usage in the River of Thames, All shipps
and vessels lyeing in the sayd River must and ought to have buoyes
whereby it may be discerned and discovered where the Anchors of such
shippes doe lye, And in case there be noe buoyes to the sayd Anchor and any ship or vessel be bilged thereon the
ship or vessel to which such Anchor belongeth that hath noe buoy
and the Owners and master of the sayd ship or vessel ought by the
like Custome of the River of Thames make satisfaction for such damages
as shall happen and be occasioned by the sayd Bilging. And saith
he knoweth the premises being a Mariner and having for theis 15
yeares past or thereabouts belonged to the Port of London and River
of Thames, And otherwise referring himselfe to the Law he cannot depose

To the twelfth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that there was
a Convoy appointed to goe to the Port aforesaid on this voyage, the
benefit of which convoy by the disaster aforesaid is lost, and thereby
the Commonwealth in the mens wages victuals and losse of tyme of their sayd ship Abraham
have suffered damage to the value of threescore pounds sterling
at the least. over and besides the damages above by him sett forth
and over and besides the damage their Affaires in Scotland may
thereby have suffered or doe suffer which he is not able to value. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

James Leslie [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before
Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin

See the Interrogatories after John Bates et cetera.
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

John Bates of Shadwell in the County of Middlesex
mariner one of the Company of the sayd shipp the
Abraham aged five and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first and second areticles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that in or about the month of August last past the Keepers of the Liberty
of England by Authority of Parliament were lawfully possessed of the
arlate shipp the Abraham which was formerly called the Abrahams
Sacrifice, by vertue of a sentence of condemnation in this Court, and about
the same tyme the right honourable the Counsell of State imployed the sayd shipp
in a voyage to be made with her to Saint Johnstons in Scotalnd under the
conduct of James Lashey his precontest as Master of her, and saith
that about the same tyme there were laden aboard the sayd shipp for
the use of this Commonwealth and their Souldiers in Scotland three hundred
bedds with furniture thereto belonging to be in the sayd shipp carryed
to
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.39v Annotate
to Saint Johnstons aforesayd and there delivered to the Agents of this
Commonwealth for the supply and use of their souldiers. all which
this deponent knoweth being one of the sayd shippes Company and
assisting att the receyving and stowing aboard the sayd bedds
And otherwise hee cannot depose referring himselfe to the Acts of this Court

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that about the same
tyme or not long after there were likewise laden aboard the sayd
shipp for mr fflints accompt and others of this citty severall fatts
Chests boxes and ffardalls to be carryed to Scotland and there
delivered, the particulars of which goods or kinds of them or names of
the partyes to whom the same doe belong otherwise than as aforesayd hee
cannot depose. And saith he assisted at the stowing of the sayd
boxes chests and ffardells ad further cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the lading
of the sayd bedds and goods aforesayd videlicet about three weekes now
past the sayd shipp Abraham  being ready to sett sayle and proceed
upon her sayd voyage was in the River of Thames within the flowing
and ebbing of the sea of the sight of this deponent bilged upon an
anchor then lyeing in the sayd River without any buoy to it, and
by the meanes thereof the sayd shipp and her lading sanke in the
sayd River and became much spoyled and damnifyed. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the sayd shipp and her lading being bilged as aforesayd lay under
water three dayes and upward before she could be weighed, And saith
the sayd beds were ill wett and fowled with mud and dirt and thereby
much damnifyed, and the hull of the sayd shipp was fowly broken, and
two of her hawzers broken, and much cordage broken and lost, and
a Capsten lost, and the sayles much damnifyed and great charges
and expenses were made in providing of Lighters for unlading
the sayd bedds and goods and in weighing the sayd shipp and her
lading and provideing warehowses and men to preserve and looke
to the sayd goods and in repairing and amending the sayd shipp
and her furniture; but how much the sayd dammages in the whole
or the dammage done and sustained in any of the particulars above
specifyed did or doth amount unto he is not able to sett forth, not
having seene any valuation made, or the moneyes for repaire of
the same expended and disbursed; howbeit he saith the sayd
dammages did really and truly happen of his certaine knowledge
and sight. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd goods belonging
to Mr fflint and others as aforesayd were wett and receyved some dammage
by the bilging of the sayd shipp, but to what value not knoweing what
goods they were in kind, not the quality of them he knoweth not and otherwise
cannot depose

To the eighth and ninth articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that all
and singular the sayd dammages did happen by the [?bilging] of the shipp [?Abraham]
as aforesayd, And saith that the Anchor whereon the shipp Abraham was
bilged of the sight of this deponent did belong to and ws the Anchor
of the sayd shipp the Supply whereof the arlate Mr Oakes was and is
in [?parte]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.40r Annotate
master, And the sayd author was of this deponents sight [?] to a cable[?]
which did belong to the sayd shipp the supply and was [?] thereunto
And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 10th aticle of the sayd allegtion This deponent saith that of this deponents 
sight the sayd Anchor lay in a plate in the River of Thames where
shipps doe usually ride, and often pass, And saith that the sayd Anchor
att the tyme of the building of the [?] [?]. Thereon, as aforesayd
of the certine knowledge of this deponent who sett the sayd  anchor
and saw the shippe [?] theron had now buoy or any marke whereby
it might be seene or [?] that any Anchor law there. And otherwise 
he cannot depose. 

To the [?] he saith it is the Custome of the River of Thames that 
every Anchor [?] in the river mast and out to have a buoy to it whereby it may be
discovered and knowne, and that all damages happening by anchors that 
wont buoys must and ought to be made good and [?] by the shipps 
whereunto such anchors belong and by the [?] of such shipps, which
he knoweth being a mariner and hath belonged to this port of London 
and river of Thames for theis 16 yeares now past. And otherwise 
referring himself to the law he cannot depose. 

To the twelth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by means
of bilging the sayd shipp the Commonwealth hath [?] damages 
[?] and besides the particulars aboev mentioned, in the [?]
of part of the [?] of the sayd shipp and in [?] ways [?] 
and loss[?] of tyme, and also in being [?] of a Convoy
wherewith the sayd shipp should have gone; to a [?] [?], but
to what value in certayne he knoweth not nor can estimate as he 
saith. And otherwise cannot depose

To the Cross Interrogatories 

To the .1. he saith he is one of the Company of the Abraham and comes
to be a witnes by contraint and rder of Captain Kolke an Agent for 
this Commonwealth and otherwise negatively.

To the .2. he saith the bilge or damage happened in the fore part of 
Lough of the Abraham. And saith he heard the interate James
Lasky and Mr fflint tell Mr Pakes the master of the supply that the anchor
which lay under the bough of their sayd [?] the Abraham was the
sme which did the damage to the sayd vessall, and heard them desire
the sayd Oakes to doe what he could to remove the sayd Anchor. And 
otherwise cannot depose.

To the third he saith that after the shipp Abraham was weighed upp
[?] the next day after as he remembereth, this deponent did [?]
a small broken anchor with [?] and [?] of a [?] but without [?], but he saith the sayd broken
anchor did not the damage in question, for he saith the sayd broken 
anchor lay the distance of 25 shipps breadth from the place where the Abraham[?]
was bilged, and the sayd broken anchor was loose and not tyed to any 
ahipp, and the anchor that did the damage was of this deponents
sight and fooling[?] fastened by ropes to the sayd shipp supply, and
moreover saith that the Anchor which did the damage was of the [?]
of the deponent and certane knowlege a whole anchor and not broken and had her [?] and [?] [?]. 
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.40v Annotate
And saith he heard not any one say that the anchor which did the
dammage was not fastned to the Supply, but did heare the sayd Oakes
utterly disclayme the sayd broken anchor to have ever belonged
to the sayd vessell the Supply, and otherwise he cannot depose

To the fourth he saith that the shipp the Abraham sunke twice and
was weighed twice. and saith that the dammage was done in the
place where she first sunke having struck upon the anchor of
the Supply which caused her so to sinke. and saith that after her
first weighing she was removed about 24 foot from the place
where she first sunke but her dammage was so great by the anchor
as aforesayd that she sanke a second tyme, and happened at her
second sinking to lye neere the sayd broken anchor but not
upon it, neither did she beare upon it att all. And saith that true
it is that the hulke made use of for weighing of the Abraham
being grounded upon the same anchor which did the dammage to the
Abraham, this deponent and others did after the weighing of the
Abraham from the place where she sanke the second tyme being
neer but not upon the sayd broken anchor, presently goe to see the
place where the Supplyes anchor lay, and found it to lye 24 foot
and upward from the place where the Abraham sanke the second
tyme, but in the very same place where the Abraham was dammaged
and sunke the first tyme. And otherwise canot depose, saving
he saith he doth not know whether the Supplyes Anchor were cleare
from all dammage in regard the sayd Oakes though much importuned
thereto refused to weigh it.

To the fifth he saith It is very possible for a heavy vessell to be
bilged upon an anchor without hurting it or breaking the flooke
thereof especially an Holland vessell slightly built as the Abraham was
and is, and saith the flooke of the sayd Anchor did peirce the Abraham
in her plankes betwixt her timbers. and otherwise saving his foregoeing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the 6th he saith that the Anchor which did the dammage in question
was fastened to the Moorings of the fore part of the shipp Supply
and saith that the sayd broken anchor was left with Mr Lasly interrate
but is stollen away as this Rendent beleiveth out of his custody, but
where it is or what it is become of it he knoweth not. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 7th he saith and referrreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and otherwise cannot depose, saving he saith he sawe not the bbedds
bookes packs and sugers opened, four Chests of sugar onely excepted
and one dry fatt of sugar, the sugar of all which was turned to
water most of it and become useles, and was spoyled.

John [MARKE] Bates
his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin
----
The sayd James Lashly to the
sayd Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT], he saith he is master of the sayd shipp the Abraham and hath noe
other Interest in her nor in her lading, and cometh to be a witness by
the meanes of Captaine Kelke, and expecteth noe benefit att all by or
for his testimony in this cause.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.41r Annotate
To the second he saith. the damage was done to the Abraham in her Lough and
starboard bough thereof neere the keale within one strake thereof. and saith
he told the interrate oakes that the anchor which did the dammage was the
Anchor that lay under the bough of the Abraham, and desired the sayd
Oakes to weigh the sayd anchor after the dammage was done but he refused
so to doe. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third and fourth he saith that the sayd shipp the Abraham was belayed as
aforesayd upon a thursday, and immediately thereupon this Rendent under went
the cords whereto the anchor whereon the shipp was bilged was tyed, and
by following with his hand found then fastned to the hawser or moorings
of the Supply, and the next day procured a hulke to weigh the Abraham
ipon weighing whereof she became loose from the sayd anchor, and was
by helpe of the sayd hulke swunge about 24 foot off from the
place where the sayd anchor lay that bilged her, but her dammage
being great and much water in her hold before she could be swung
to the shoare she sanke neere to a place where a broken anchor being
the anchor with the broken shanke interrate happened to lye, and saith
that upon the Saturday the sayd broken anchor with a boate hooke
was found but not under the bough of the Abraham as is suggested in
theis Interrogatoryes but att a distance from her so as the Abraham did not
touch the same att all. and saith that true it is that the sayd broken
anchor being weighed the sayd Mr Oakes did deny that it did ever belong
to his vessell, and saith it is true that the sayd broken anchor did ly
about 24 foot from the Anchor of the Supply, Howbeit this Rendent
saith for the reasons aforesayd that the sayd broken anchor did not doe
the dammage but the anchor of the Supply as he hath predeposed; And
saith that it is true that the anchor of the Supply did lye about
24 foot from the place where the Abraham was sunke after her first
weighing and swinging upon the hulke as aforesayd, but was found
to lye in the very same place where the Abraham was bilged and first
sunke by being so bilged. And he saith that the sayd Oakes did not
weigh the Supplyes anchor but absolutely refused so to doe, neyther
was the sayd Anchor weighed att all so farr as this Rendent knoweth
And otherwise to theis Interrogatories he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith there is noe necessity att all that a heavy vessell
striking upon an anchor and being bilged thereon should breake the sayd
anchor. and saith the anchor of the Supply did with one of her flookes
peirce the side of the Abraham but was [?severed] therefrom by weighing
And saith that the sayd Oakes refusing to weigh the Anchor he could
not see nor can depose whethery the sayd Anchor be wholly without hurt or
noe. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith the anchor which did the dammage was fastened to the
hawse or Moorings of the fore[?part] of the Supply. And saith the sayd
broken Anchor was in this Rendents possession, but he tooke it not into his
shipp but layd it upon the hulke whereon the Abraham was weighed and
from
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.41v Annotate
from thence it was as he beleiveth stolln or taken away but by who
he knoweth not nor knoweth where it is. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the seventh he saith he saw none of the bedds books sugar or other things
opened before the damages but saw the beds opened after the sayd damage
and saw likewise 4 Chests and one dry fatt opened after the sayd damage the sugars whereof
were spoyled and consumed and turned into water and saith he knoweth
the damage in the sayd bedds and other goods happened by meanes
of bilging the Abraham as aforesayd upon the anchor of the supply
as well for the reasons aforesaid as for that the Abraham was a tight
a stanch shipp before the bilging thereof as aforesaid and otherwise
cannot depose.

James Leslie [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Dr Godolphin
and Dr Clarke
----
The 12th day of October 1653

The keepe of the Liberty of England by)
Authority of Parliament against a certaine )
shipp or vessell named the Lewis of Rochell (whereof)
one Dominicas Merseria was Master and her tackle and)
furniture and whatsoever goods wares and merchandizes)
aboard the same taken and seized by certain shipps in)
the imediat service of this Commonwalth. Jacob)
Budd.

Examined upon an allegation on the behalf
of the sayd Keepers of the Liberty of
England by authority of Parliament.

Jacob Reynolds of the Citty of London Captaine
or Commander of the Kentish frigott in the
immediat service of this Commonwealth aged thirty
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followth vicidet

To the first second and third and forth articles of the sayd allegations this deponent
saith and deposeth that about the beginning of July
1653 last past This deponent being Captaine and Commander of the
sayd shipp the Kentish frigot in the immediat service of this
Commonwealth did wish the sayd frigot take and surprise the arlat
shipp the Lewis with all the goods and lading in her, which sayd
shipp Lewis as by the confessions of the Master and Company of the
sayd shipp upon Oath and by the papers found aboard her did appear
came from or began her outward voyage from Rochell in ffrance
and having taken her lading in Greenland was bound for the Texell
meaning by their said confessions as this deponent conceyveth the Port of Amsterdam, and saith
that this deponent by and with his sayd shipp the Kentish frigot and
all other Captains with their shipps in the immediate service of this
Commonweath had and have full power and Authority to take and surprise
the ffrench King or his subiects or the States of the united Provinces
the sayd King and States and their subiects respectively to this Commonwealth
voluntarily declared to this deponent that his shipp was bound for the Texell
as aforesayd and that she would have gone thither had she not bene by this
deponent intercepted. And otherwise he cannot depose saving his subsequent
depositions.

To the fifth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
the Lewis was taken neere to a place called Holygolam and saith the sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.42r Annotate
sayd place was and is altogether out of the way from Greenland to ffrance, and was and is
in the direct way from Greenland to the Texell and in truth the sayd shipp
Lewis was then making her direct Course for Holland, and as the master
of her confessed would and might have made the Texell before this deponent
could have come upp with her but that he did take this deponents frigott
to be a Mann of Warr of Holland. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd master of the
Lewis, after he was seized did confesse and declare to this deponent that he was
att Greenland in Company of some other shipps, which as he sayd being bound
for ffrance went thither another way, and that himselfe [?proceeded] with them and
was bound for the Texell as aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the seventh article of the sayd allegacion This deponent saith that the sayd
master of the Lewis Dominique de Margerie did after his being seized
as aforesayd freely and readily and voluntarily confesse and acknowledge
to this deponent and others that his sayd shipp was bound for the Texell
and that his ships ladeing being oyles and whale bones was good
prize to the English. And moreover saith that the sayd dominique de
Margerie did never shew to this deponent nor to any other for ought he
knoweth or believeth any License from the right honourable the Counsell of
State for the free passage of the sayd shipp to ffrance, neyther did he
pretend to have any such license aboard, nor was there any such License
aboard that this deponent saw knoweth or believeth. And otherwise he
cannot depose

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation and to the first schedule thereunto
annexed and now shewne him this Examinat he saith, that after the seizure
aforesayd and on or about the last day of July last past the master and Pilot
or Steerman of the sayd shipp the Lewis were examined by Captain Brandley
Commander of the Essex frigat, having likewise generall Command
of a Squadron of [XXX?] sayle of shipps and having power to administer
an Oath upon all such occasions as concerned this Commonwealth in this sayd
Squadron whereto the sayd Kentish frigot did belong, And saith that the
sayd master and Pilot being by the sayd Captain Brandly duly Sworne to Speake the truth, their confessions
and examinations were taken in writing, this deponent being present. And
farther saith that the first paper or schedule to the allegacion annexed was
and is the orginall Confession of the sayd master and Pilot and with their
handwriting respectively was and is signed and subscribed. And the
sayd Master and Pilot did respective in the hearing of this deponent confesse
and declare as therein is expressed, and in the sight of this deponent did
subscribe their names respectively thereto as in the sayd paper is now to be
seen. And otherwise cannot depose

To the ninth article of the sayd allegation and to the second pay or schedule thereto
annexed and now shewne him he saith that the sayd schedule was found aboard
the sayd shipp the Lewis att the tyme of the seizure aforesayd, and was delivered
to this deponent by the foresaid Master of the Lewis. And att the tyme of the delivery
thereof he told this deponent That the same was the paper of this Instructions
from his Owners. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Ja. Reynolds [SIGNATURE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.42v Annotate
The same day./. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Godfrey Reader of Shadwell in the County
of Middlesex Mariner and Gunner of the Kentish
frigott in the immediate service of this Commonwealth
aged four and twenty yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first artticle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that All
shipps of warr in the immediate service and pay of this Commonwealth
are authorized and impowered to seize and take all shipps and
vessells with their respective ladings belonging to the subiects
of the ffrench King or States of the United Provinces to and for
the satisfaction of severall great dammages that by the violences
of the sayd ffrench King and his subiects and the sayd States of
the United Provinces and their subiects have bene done to this
Commonwealth and the subiects thereofm and the same was and is as he
saith notorious and commonly knowne and beleived and otherwise cannpt
depose.

To the second third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that in or about the beginning of August 1653 last past the sayd
Kentish frigot whereof Captaine Reynolds was Commander and this
deponent Master Gunner being in the immediate service of this
Commonwealth did take and surprize the arlate shipp the Lewis
(whereof one Dominicus Merseria was master) which as the sayd master
of her did confesse was a ffrench vessell belonging to ffrench men
and Port of Rochell and began her outward voyage from Rochell
and had taken in her lading being oyles att Greenland and was
bound for the Texell meaning the Port of Amsterdam in Holland
and thither was foeing and would have gone with her lading if
she had not bene stayd and intercepted. And this deponent saith
of his sight and knowledge the sayd shipp did a little before
she was seized sayle in a direct course for the Texell, and thither
as the sayd master of her sayd would in probability ave come
that night, speaking of the say whereof she was seized if she
had not bene intercepted as afresayd, which confessions this deponent
heard the sayd Dominicus Merseria freely and voluntarily make
and was present att the taking of the sayd shipp as aforesayd and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd shipp
the Lewis was seized and taken neere a place called Holygoland, which
is alltogether out of the way from Greenland to ffrance but was and
is the direct way to the Texell, and but about ten or twelve leagues
from
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.43r Annotate
from thence and indeed the sayd shipp the Lewis was then steering her
Course directly for the Texall as he hath predeposed. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the
seizure of the shipp Lewis as aforesayd he heard the master of her say
and affirme that the sayd shipp came from Greenland in the Company
of three other vessells which three were bound for france, and that
the Lewis parted with them off of the North of Scotland, she being
bound for the Texall as aforesayd and the sayd other three shipps designing
to make for ffarnce by the north of Scotland and Ireland; which
confessions of the sayd master this deponent heard him freely make, and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the seaventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith he heard the sayd
master of the Lewis freely say and acknowledge that the sayd shipp was
bound for the Texall and that her lading was good prize to the English
and saith there was not any License from the right honorable the Councell
of State for the free passage of the sayd shipp Lewis to ffrance, shewne
to the Captaine of the Kentish frigot that ade the surprizall nor
to any other that this deponent saw knew or heard of. And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith he was present
and saw when the Master of the Lewis aforesayd was sent for aboard
the Essex frigat commannded by Captaine Brandley, and hath credibly heard
that the sayd master did confesse and acknowledge before the sayd
Captaine Brandley and others upon oath that the sayd shipp did belong
to Rochel and had bene att Greenland and was bound with her lading
being oyles and whale bone to the Texall, and whether the first
paper or schedule to the allegation annexed be the very originall
confession of the sayd master taken in writing he cannot depose

To the ninth he saith he hath credibly heard and beleiveth to be
true that the second paper or schedule to the sayd allegation annexed
and now shewne him was found aboard the sayd shipp the Lewis att the
tyme of her seizure aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true. And otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Doctor Godolphin)

Godfry Reader [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 14th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of John Hawkes, Jacob Hoffener)
Claes Stading Constans Corsemaker)
derrick hetling, and Mathias Witts.)
Thomas Eyke, hans [?Loer], and Claes [Ynt])
of Ravell in Sweden for their goods and)
merchandizes by them severally laden)
on board the shipp the young Boor (whereof)
was master Jacob Cornelison) in fact)
taken and surprized by some of the shipps)
of the State and Commonwealth of England)
fra. dt.  Bud ffranklin)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers.

Jacob Cornelison of Schelling mariner
master of the sayd shipp the Young Boor
aged three and thirty yeares a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.43v Annotate
To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or about
the moneth of May last past the arlate John Hawkes Jacob [?Hoffener]
and others hereafter mentioned did for their Accompts severally lade aboard
the sayd shipp the young Boer then lyeing neere Revell in the dominion
of the queene of Sweden the severall goods and merchandizes hereafer
mentioned to be in the sayd shipp transported to Amsterdam and there to be
delivered for their severall Accompts, that is to say the saud John Hawkes
did lade aboard the sayd shipp for his Accompt twenty lasts of Rye
and twenty five lasts of barley. and the sayd Jacob Hoffener for his
owne Accompt twenty lasts of Rye and twenty lasts of Barly. and
Claes Steding for his owne Accompt tenn lasts of Rye and the
sayd Constans Corsemaker for his owne Accompt one hundred and forty Bundles of
Russia fflaz, the weight whereof he knoweth not. and the sayd
derrick [?hetling] six great and large lackes of leather the weight
whereof he knoweth not for his owne Accompt
And the sayd Claes y[?ut] for his owne Accompt six lasts of barley
and saith, that in May June and July last past 1653. the sayd John
hawkes and other the persons above mentioned were and att present are
the severall and respective Owners of the sayd respective
merchandizes and goods, and that he knoweth the premisses in that
he is master of the sayd shipp and receyved the sayd goods aboard
his sayd shipp att Revell for the respective Accompts aforesayd
of and from the sayd respective Owners, who were in the quiet
possession of the sayd goods respectively before and att the tyme of the
lading thereof. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the lading
and putting of the sayd severall goods and merchandizes aboard the
sayd shipp the above mentioned John Hawkes, Jacob Hoffener, Claes
Stading, Constans Corsemaker, Derrick Hotling Mathew Witte
Thomas Eyke, Hans [?Leer] and Claes yutt did severally send letters and
advises directed to their severall factors to Amsterdam, which letters and
advises this deponent brought with him in the sayd shipp from Revell, and
the same together with other papers concerning the sayd shipp and the
rest of her lading were all on board the sayd shipp the young Boer att
the tyme of the taking and surprizeing of the sayd shipp and her lading
by the shipps of this Commonwealth of England and came into the possession
of them that made the seizure, the premisses he knoweth being aboard the
sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure, and having all the sayd letters and
papers then on board putt and disposed in a bagg having this deponents
name and the sayd shipps name thereon. But what were the contents of the sayd letters
or what is become of the same he knoweth not. And otherwise cannot depose

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the aforesayd
severall goods were really laden as aforesayd for the Accompt of the
respective persons above mentioned, and that they did and doe [?XXXX]
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.44r Annotate
[CHECK THIS PAGE - REQUIRES MAJOR EDITING] the sole hazard and ad, which he knoweth for the reasons
aforesayd, and varily Golsliosly? gat? noe Scotlander or any other pson (person?)
dubious/jealous? of the states of the united provinces or of the ffrench King
or of any Prince or State in hostility? with the Commonwelth of England
had? or hath? any right title or interest? in the same or any gt thereof?
And further Cannot depose saving that the aforesayd owner of the
sayd goods did acquaint this deponent severally and respectively all the
severall fyrrwd? of having the land? gal? the payd goods and merchandises
were their own goods and laden on for their owne accompt and in risgo
irespectivaly? and otherwise cannot deposd.

To the fifth al of the sayd atton? this deponent faith? gal? after the said
severall goods wands? andpurishandifor? . Severally mentioned as aforesayd
were laden aboard the sayd ship the 'young Boer' the sayd shipp did -
Set sail to with the sayme from Revell aforesayd towards Amstordam
and in the fourfie? afterwards? was wily? for loading taken? $? surprised
by some of the shipps of the comonwaalth? and gal? at the tyme?
of the takeing and surprizeing of the sayd shipp and her ladeing all
and singular the sayd wheat rye barley, flax and coalgar? were
on board her and came into the possession of them who surprized 
the sayd shipp, all which he knoweth being present and aboard att the
sayd tyme of seizure and otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allon This deponent saith and deposeth -
that the arlate John Hawkes, Jacob Hoffener, Claes Stedding, Constans
Corfemaker, Derrick Hetling, Mathias Witt Thomas Eyks, Hans
Loer, and Claes Yut, were and are Swedes and every of then by common - -
repute was and is a Swede and the accompted, and saith that of his
certayne knowledge they and every of them in the sayd monethes of -
May and June and att the severall tyme and tymes of the severall
ladeing and putting of the sayd severall goods and merchandises
aboard and for two yeares before of this deponents knowledge
and for ten years and upwards before by common repute, and continually
since were and are Burghers and inhabitants of Revell in Swethland
and for all the sayd tyme were and are subjects of the Queene of 
Swedland and so accounted, and every one of them was and is a subject
of the sayd Queene of Swedland and for and as such commonly accounted -
reputed and taken. the premises? he well and knoweth having  often traded
with his shipps att Revell and having made severall voyages with the 
goods of the said respective Owners, by which means he comes to have
particular and distinct knowledge of them and every of. And otherwise 
cannot depose.

To the last he saith the? depositions are true And agorwife? cannot deposes

To the Cross Interrogatorys [CENTRE HEADING]

To the one he saith he was and is master of the sayd shipe the 'young Boer', and 
so hath been for these 2 yeares now passd, and tooke first Charge of her gorath?
Amsterdam, and was aboard her att the tyme of seizure

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.44v Annotate
To the second he saith he knoweth the parties interrate and hath knowne the sayd John
Hawkes, Claes Stedding, Constance Corsemaker, Mathias Witts, Thomas
Eyke Hans Loer and Claes Yut seven yeares or thereabouts respectivelt
and the sayd Jacob Hossener and Derrick Hetling 2 yeares or thereabouts
respectively. and saith he saw all and every of the sayd persons att Revell
whilst the sayd shipp the young Boer lay there in the Company of him
this Rendent. And further cannot depose.

To the third he saith the sayd severall respective Owners and Claymers did
themselves lade all and sngular the aforesayd goods respectively. and
this deponent before the ladeing thereof did see the sayd goods in
their possessions respectively that is to say in the respective howses of
every of the sayd persons att Revell for whose Accompt he hath sett
forth the same to be laden as aforesayd respectively. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the fourth he saith that John Hawkes Jacob Hosserner Claes Stading
Constance Corsemaker Derrick Hetling and Claes Yut doe live and
have their howses respectively in the Long Street of Ravell in Swedland
and Matthias Witts in Varick Street in Revell and Hans Loer in a little
street there the name of which he hath forgotten, and sayeth that Thomas
Eyke lives in the sayd Vitty of ffevell but the name of the street where
his howse is he knoweth not. and saith by common repute the sayd partyes
have lived in Revell aforesayd all their tyme;and the sayd John
Hawkes Claes Stedding Constance Corsemaker, Matthias Witts
Thomas Eyke Jans Loer ad Claes Yut for seven yeares last of this
Rendents knowledge have bene Inhabitants of the sayd Citty, and
the sayd Jacob Hossener and Derrick Hetling have there of this
Rendents like knowedge inhabited for theis 2 yeares last past
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith that he knoweth the aforesayd Owners and parteyes
above mentioned to be lawfull Owners of the sayd goods respectively
for the reasons above by him set forth whereto he referreth himselfe
and otherwise negatively, saving he was present when the sayd
Matthias Witt bought five lasts of Rye part of the .11. lasts laden
for his Accompt as aforesayd, And saith the sayd Matthias Witt did
contract for the same  with Hevert Call of Revell of whom he bought
the same for 36. Rix dollars per last but this Rendent saw not the money
payd. And further cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith he was borne in the Island of Skelling a place
subiect to the States of the United Provinces and there hath his
habitation. And otherwise negatively.

To the .7. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than he hath predeposed.

To the 8. negatively to every part thereof.

To the 9. he saith he cannot depose.

To the tenth he saith the sayd shipp the Young Bower began her
outward voyage from Amsterdam in the month of May 1653 last past
and saith she was in her ballast and had noe lading and in
her ballast went directly from Amsterdam to Revell aforesayd
and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 11th. and 12th. he saith that the sayd shipp was in her ballast
onely as aforesayd in her outward voyage.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.45r Annotate
To the 13. he saith there were severall Cocquetts ffactories papers and
other writings aboard the sayd shipp when she was seized, all which came
into the possession of the Captaine and his Company that made the
surprizall but the Contents of the same he knoweth not. And
saith that since the sayd shipp came from her last port there were not so
far as this Rendent knoweth beleiveth or hath heard any papers or writings
torne burnt throwne over board or otherwise made away had or concealed
or undelivered to the sayd Captaine and Company that made the sayd seizure
And otherwise cannot depose

To the 14. he saith that he this Rendent was to receyve his fraight for the
foresayd goods of the respective factors of the aforesayd Owners to whom
the sayd goods were severally consigned, and att the  place of their
consignment videlicet Amsterdam. and saith that in case the saud shipp
had arrived safely to Amsterdam and there delivered her lading, He this
Rendent was and should have bene att full liberty to have sayled his sayd
shipp whither he had pleased, according as he should gett ymployment
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .15. he saith that he this Rendent had Instructions by word of mouth
to transport the sayd goods to Amsterdam and there to deliver the same
to the respective factors to whom they were consigned respectively, and
made entreyes of the sayd goods and the partyes to whome they were
consigned respectively in the Table booke which is in the hands of them
that made the seizure. and saith he had noe other Instructions eyther
by word of mouth or writing the aforesayd letters directed to the sayd
factors to whom the goods were consigned, whose contents he
knoweth not, onely excepted And otherwise cannot depose.

Jacob Cornelse Jong[?bahr] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges in Court.
----
The fifteenth day of October 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Antonio de Cuyper of Dantzick)
for one sixteenth part of the shipp the Young)
Boer and her Tackle and furniture (whereof)
Jacob Cornelison is master) and of John Passant)
of Dantzick for another sixteenth part of)
the sayd shipp and her tackle and furniture)
Budd. ffrancklin)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers.

ffra: dt.

Jacob Cornelison of Schelling Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Young Boer
aged three and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
the arlate John Eleeson of Amsterdam in the monethes of ffebruary
and March 1650. and in March and the beginning of April 1652. was
the lawfull Owner and Proprietor of one quarter part of the sayd shipp
the Young Boer and her tackle and furniture and for such was commonly
accounted and reputed. And he further saith that in or about the sayd moneth
of April 1651, He this deponent by the expresse Order and direction
of the arlate Antonio de Cuyper and with his moneyes and for his 
use did buy of and from the sayd Ebeeson owner of one quarter
part
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.45v Annotate
part of the sayd shipp as is above declared, one 16th part of the same ship
the Young Boar with tackle and furniture, for the summe or value
of 700 Gilders Hollands money, which sayd summe of 700 Gilders
this deponent did really and truly pay unto the sayd John Ebeeson
for the sayd 16th part of the foresayd shipp and tackle and furniture for
and on the behalfe of the producent Antonio de Cuys and the sayd John Ebeeson did
receyve the same. And moreover saith that att or about the same tyme
This deponent by expresse order and direction of the arlate John Pass[?XX]
and for his use and with his moneyes did buy of the sayd John Ebeeson
one other 16th part of the sayd shipp the Young Boer and her tackle
and furniture for 700 guilders more, which sayd 700 guilders this
deponent payd to him the sayd Ebeeson for the sayd 16th part of the sayd
ship tackle and furniture on the behalfe o the sayd John Passnam
and the sayd Ebeeson receyved the same of him this deponent. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
sayd moneth of Aprill sand in May and June 1651. and continually
since the buyeing of the sayd severall sixteenth parts of the saud
shipp the young Boer her tackle and furniture as aforesayd by the sayd
Antonio de Cuyper and John Passauant, He the sayd Antonio de
Cuyper was and is and so ought to be the lawfull Owner and
Proprietor of one .16.th part of the sayd shipp and her tackle and
furniture and for such was and is commonly accounted and reputed
And the sayd John Passuant for all the tyme aforesayd was and is
and ought to be the lawfull Owner and Proprietor of one other
16th part of the sayd shipp tackle and furniture and for and as
suc was and is commonly accounted reputed and taken. the premisses
he knoweth having bene master of the sayd shipp for and dureing
all the sayd tyme, and for the reasons aforesayd and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
sayd Antonio de Cuyper and John Passuant for and in all the
voyages made with the sayd shipp since the sayd moneth of April 1651
have contributed according to their sayd respective shares in the sayd
shipp for and towards the setting her out to sea, And he this deponent
from tyme to tyme during all the sayd tyme hath payd and accompted
and is to accompt and pay unto them the sayd Antonio de Cuyper and
John Passuant the proffitts of the sayd shipp according to their severall
and respective shares therein, as the sayd proffitts have from tyme
to tyme arisen and shall from tyme to tyme arise, so long as they
continue their sayd respective Interests therein. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the sayd
monethes of April May and June 1651. and att the tyme and tyme
of buying the sayd severall sixteenth parts of the sayd shipp as
aforesayd and for eleven yeares next before of this deponents
certayne
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.46r Annotate
[CHECK THIS PAGE - REQUIRES MAJOR EDITING]
certayne knowledge and continually find the sayd Antonia du Cuyper
and John Passuant were and are Citizens Inhabitants and subjects
and each and every of them was and is a Citizen Inhabitant and 
subject of the free City and State of Dantzyck and so accounted.
and are not nor were not eyther of them is or ever was that this
deponent knoweth beleiveth or hath heard subiect to the States of the
United Provinces, of the ffrench King, or of any Prince or State
in histility with this Commonwealth of England nor so accounted. And 
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last hee saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. he saith he is master of the young Boer and so hath bene for.
about 2 yeares and an halfe and came first aboard her att Amsterdam
and was in her att the tyme of seizure.

To the .2. [he] [saith] he knoweth both the Parties [interrogated] and hath knowne
[them] 13. yeares and upwards respectively, and saith by [common] [repute]
they are [Dantzyckers] borne and [there] [have] lived all their tyme, and 
for 13 yeares [past] of [this] deponents knowledge, and [there] [have] their
[howses] wives children and familyes, and saith Antonio de Caypers
[howse] is att the Corner of the [?Haye] street by the water side in Dantzyck
and the howse of John [Passuant] is [neere] to the [?Parle] Church or the 
G[reat] Church of Dantzyck.

To the [3.] [he] [saith] he hath knowne the sayd shipp the young Boer [three]
yeares or thereabouts and saith she was built att Edam in Holland about
3 yeares at the Co[sts] of an Inhabitant of [Edam] whose name [he] [remembreth]
not And saith [this] deponent did buy the sayd [2. 16th] [parts] of the young 
Boer now in question att [Amsterdam] on the behalfe of the sayd [present] Owners
and [saith] [there] [was] not nor any bill of sale for the same [made] [nor] [eyther]
of [them], and [hath] fully satisfyed the [rest] of [this] [Interrogatory] in [his]
foregoeing deposition [whereto] [he] [referrs] [himselfe].

To the 4 and [5.] [he] [referreth] himselfe to said foregoeing depositions
wherein he hath [declared] the whole [truth] so farr as he knoweth and
otherwise negatively.

To the .6. [he] [saith] he is a native and inhabitant of Skelling being an
Island under the jurisdiction of the States Generall of the united 
Provinces and otherwise negatively.

To the .7. [he] [saith] he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .8. [he] [saith] the sayd shipp [began] her outward voyage in May last
from the Port of [Amsterdam], and saith [that] the sayd Antonio [?de] Cuyper
and John [Passuant] did by their respective [factors] att [Amsterdam] contribute
towards the then setting forth of the sayd shipp and saith [he][doth]
not know [beleive] or [hath] [heard] [that] [since] [June] 1651. the sayd Antonio
[?de] Cuyper and John  [Passuant] [have] [reconveyed] or sold [agayne] [the] 
[sayd] two sixteenth [parts] of the sayd shipp to the sayd John [?XXXson] or any 
[other] [person] [whatsoever], and otherwise [cannot] [depose].

Sam [Delaplace] [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Jacob [Cornelison] [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges in Court
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.46v Annotate
The 17th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of the State)

Captaine Christofer Myngs Commannder of the
Elizabeth frigot in the service of this Commonwealth
aged 28 yeares or thereabouts, sworne before the
right Worshipfull William Clerke and John Godolphin
doctors of lawes Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath.

That on the third of this instant October about foure leagues off dieppe
aout nine of the clocke in the fore noone hee this deponent in the said frigott
Elizabeth espied twenty foure
saile of shipps, and gave chace unto them, and about two of the clock in the
afternoone came almost up with the hinder most of them, and that the
headmost of the fleete were two holland men of warr (as this deponent afterwards
found) and that the said two holland men of warr were chacing a private
man of warr of dover named Captaine Allington, and with the said [?respective]
fleete had stood about five houres after him:- And that the said two holland
men of warr seeing the said frigot soe neere came up and readie to fall
in with the said fleete convoyed by them, tacked upon her to the [?XXX] of
the said fleete, and being come up there[?with], the said fleete alsoe
tacked. And forth with the said two men of warr being most [?westherly] [?XX]
up with the Elizabeth frigot and exchanged their broade sides with her
and tacked upon her againe, but by shott from the Elizabeth [?XXXX]
hurt, they spake one with the other, and soe bore to lea-ward through
their fleete to a third man of warr of their companie, who to that
time being farr to leaward. could not come up to the ingagement
during all which space, hee saith that the said whole fleete of merchant
men which was withn shott of them put abroad noe colours, untill
such time as the Elizabeth bore in upon and fired on them, and
then some of them put abroad hamburger colours, some Lubeck colours
and some none at all and soe they came by the lea of the Elizabeth
and this deponent commannding their boates aboard secured 18 of their [?masters]
and manned foure of their vessells, in some of which soure this
deponents men (as they informed him) found the gunns primed and
Linstocke lighted standing by them. The premisses being thus farr
donne, hee saith then the said private man of warr, chaced
as aforesaid by the said two holland man of warr came in, who
after the said vessells were all brought by the lea of the Elizabeth
came to leaward and tooke up two of the boates of the said bessells
as the skippers were therein comming aboard this deponent, and
went and manned the two vessells to which the said boates belonged
which this deponent perceiving, sent his Lieutenant to him to
admonish him to behave himselfe as was befiting towards this
deponents said prizes which had all struck and submitted unto him
this deponent, and to desire his assistance in securing them to the
downes, and to tell him that what should be thought fitting
for such his assistance, hee should bee considered by those that
were in authoritie for such affaires or to that effect
But the names of the said vessells or any of them hee remembreth not
but referreth himselfe to their [?XXX] Examinations taken at dover after this
deponent had brought them into the downes, where twnn of them were
sent by him into dover [?peere]. and the other tenn into the River of Thames

(Christpr: Myng[?s] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.47r Annotate
The 17th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

[?Riley] and company against the Lambe aforesaid)
Garret [?Xmondson] master.)

Examined upon the foresaid Interrogatories.

Smith
Greene

Dt.

2

Stephen Peterson of Rotterdam Mariner one of the
company of the said shipp the Golden Lambe, aged
19 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first, 2, 3, 5. 5 and 6th Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee
well knoweth the said shipp the Golden Lambe and came first aboard her
at the Sound about five dayes before er seizure, and saith shee belongeth
to the port of Maseland Sluce in Holland in the dominion of the States of
the United Netherlands, and was and is as hee saith good prize to the
takers in regard of the present warrs, and saith her master and most of her
company were hollanders at the time of her seizure. but the names of her
owners hee knoweth not, but hath heard that they are hollanders and
subiects of the States f the United Netherlands, and saith shee was in
ballast when shee was taken bound for Norway, and was to retourne
for Maseland Sluce to finish her voyage. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 7 and eighth , 9 and 10th hee saith hee was never in ffrance and was hired
after 16 gilders per moneth for this voyage, which the said skipper was to
pay him, upon the shipps retourne to Maseland Sluce,
and then shee sailed under the holland flagge and was taken neare
Skaga by Captaine Welch, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

Steven Pijeterse [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the foresaid Interrogatories.

3

Corneluis Garrets of hamborough Sailor one of the company
of the said shipp the Golden Lambe', aged 54 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6 hee saith that the said shipp the Golden
Lambe belongeth to the port of Maseland Sluce in holland, and that her
owners are all hollanders, subiects of the States of the United Netherlands
and dwellers in Maseland Sluce, which hee knoweth being one of
her company and having belonged three monethes unto her and made one
voyage with her to Norwary and back to Maseland Sluce before this, and
nowe being upon the second voyage to fetch firewood to bee
brought for Maseland Sluce shee was taken by Captaine Welch
and saith that one ffrancis [?dyning] is one of her owners, and the master
Garret Simondson ffisher as hee beleeveth hath a part therein, and
that this deponent was hired for [?18] gilders per moneth and to bee
paid upon retourne to Maseland Sluce where the voyage was to end
And saith the said master liveth in Maseland but was borne in the East
Land, and that two or three of the company are hollanders
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 7. 8. 9 and 10th hee saith they had the holland flagge aboard
when they were taken, and was taken on the high sea, and otherwise
hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, and saith the said shipp
was as the master said freighted by the East India company of Amsterdam
to carry letters into the sound, and thence they were to goe for Norway to
fetch firewood or els retourne [?next] way home

bij Cooraellyss garreyts [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before doctor
Clerke and doctor Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.47v Annotate
The 1st of October 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

[?Chelston] and company) 
against the shipp the greate christofer)

Examined upon the aforesaid Interrogatories. 

2

Joachim Wise of Stettin Carpenter of the said shipp
the greate Christofer, aged 44 years or thereabouts 
sworne and examined.

To the first, second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee well
knoweth the greate Christofer interrogated and was one of her company at
such time as shee was seized by Captaine Swaine, and saith shee 
was built in Stettin and that this her first voyage, and that Philip 
Radclife, one Tonnebinders widowe, and Andrew hawntowe and Michaell
[?Crunyel] her master were and are her owners, and all dwellers in 
Stettin and Subjecte of the Queen of Sweden and caused the said shipp 
to be built, and then the said master is the greatest part owner, but what
part each hath in the said shipp hee knoweth not, And that this deponent  
is alsoe a Stettin man. And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving the shipps [?merchants]
are all Stettinmen.

To the fourth hee saith the said owner have lived in Stettin all their 
lives, where as hee taketh it, they were borne) and hee hath knowne
thenmthere dwelling theise twenty years last, and otherwise 
negatively saving as aforesaid.

To the fifth hee saith that the said shipps lading at the time of her 
seizure consisted in hemp namely about a hundred bundles and a halfe
of hemp, sixteen fatts of potashes and two hundred tonne of 
linseed, all laden at Riga in Liefland under the Queene of Sweden 
by herman Barker to be carried there to Dunquirke and then 
to bee delivered to his the said hermans barker, but for whose accompt
hee knoweth not. And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving the shipps [?owners]
had also a last of barley and also a last of tarr, and the master hath some [?pXXXX]
and other goods aboard.

To the 6th hee cannot depose. 

To the 7 hee saith hee was never in ffrance, and that hee knoweth [?not]
the said Barkers brother to whenn the goods were consigned.

To the 8 hee saith hee was hired at Stettin to goe to Riga and thence to
Dunquirke with this said shipp and then to finish the voyage, and was
not agreed wuth the master [?XXX] [?XXXX] hee should have more than a common man which was 20 [?Rix] [?dollars]

To the 9 hee saith the said shipp was taken on the open sea by Captaine
Swaine.

To the 10th hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the 11th hee saith that hee never knewe the said harman Barker
before the said time hee sawe him at Riga where hee dwelleth, and
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 12 hee cannot depose, saving as aforesaid.

To the 13 and 14. negatively for his part and otherwise hee cannot depose.

The marke of
[MARKE] said [?Wise]
----
The 22 day of October
1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers et cetera against the Supply. et cetera)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3

Thomas Fettiplall of Shadwell in the County of
Middlesex Waterman aged one and thirty yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation Hee saith he cannot depose saving [?XXX]
James [?Lashly] arlate was and is master of the sayd shipp the Abraham

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath  [?XXX]
that the arlate shipp the Abraham was about the moneth of September
last past imployed by some of the Agents of this Commonwealth for [?the]
carrying of some bedds and furniture to Saint Johnstons in [?Stotham]
and knoweth that some beds were laden aboard the sayd shipp in the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.48r Annotate
he this deponent assisted to unlade the same, after the sayd shipp was bilged
in manner hereafter declared. And otherwise hee cannot depose saving
that he knoweth not how many bedds were laden aboard the sayd shipp.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that there were severall
Chests Canisters and boxes laden aboard the sayd shipp with goods in them
to be as he hath heard transported to Scotland, but who did lade the same
of for whose Accompt they were laden This deponent knoweth not. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon a thursday in
the afternoone in the moneth of September last past the tyme he otherwise
remembreth not This deponent saw the sayd shipp Abraham haveing the sayd
beds and goods aboard her bilged in the River of Thames within the flowing
and ebbing of the Sea. and saith she was so bilged by an anchor where to
(so farr as this deponent could see or find being assistant to one James Lastly
in the discovery of the hurt done) there was not any buoy fastned; and
saith that the sayd shipp by being so bilged did sinke in the water whereby
the bedds and goods aforesayd receyved much dammage and hurt. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the sayd
shipp and some of her lading lay under water in the sayd River for the Space of
three or four dayes before the same could be weighed upp againe, and
saith that the sayd bedds receyved much dammage but whether to a noble
a peice or more or lesse he saith he knoweth not, howbeit he saith he
would not have a bed or bedding of his owne so dammaged for 6 s. 8 d.
and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixthe article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp by
being so bilged and sunke suffered great hurt and dammage in her hull
hawsers Ropes Rigging and otherwise, and severalll summes of moneyes
were necessarily spent in weighing and unlading her and providing
Roome to dry the bedding aforesayd and other incident expenses, but how
much the totall of such expenses did, or doe amount unto in the whole, or
for, or in any of the foresayd particulars, he this deponent cannot sett
forth. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that of his certayne
sight and knowledge there was much dammage done in sugars laden aboard
the sayd shipp. and as he beleeveth in other goods, but to what value
in all or any the sayd sugars or other goods he knoweth not. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the dammage
aforesayd in the sayd shipp and lading happened and was aooacsioned by
the bilging of the sayd shipp in manner as aforesayd. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the Anchor
upon which the sayd shipp the Abraham was bilged was an anchor of the sayd
shipp the Supply whereof Mr Oakes arlate was and is master,a nd did
belong to the sayd shipp. The premisses This deponent knoweth for that
he was assisting to the sayd James Lashly his precontest in the discovery of
the foresayd dammage and finding the anchor that did the hurt found allso
the Cable whereto it was fastned and by following the sayd Cable found
that the same was fastned to the Bough of the sayd shipp the Supply
and otherwise he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.48v Annotate
Too the tenth and eleventh articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the sayd shipp was bilged as aforesaid in the River of Thames in a place
where shippes doe usually ride. And saith that by the Customes
of the River of Thames (well knowne to this deponent being a waterman
and the sonn of a waterman belonging to the sayd River of Thames
dammage done by an anchor without a buoy is to be satisfyed by the
shipp whereto such Anchor belongs. And otherwise referring himselfe
to the Law in that behalfe he cannot depose:

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. he saith he hath noe Interrest in the shipps or goods aforesaid nor [?relation]
to the sayd shipp. and comes to be a witnes by constraint and warrant served upon
him out of this Court by some of the officers thereof. and saith he shall not
receyve wyther profit or losse which may [?XXXX] this cause is adiudged
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith the dammage was done neere the keele in the lough of the
Abraham. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith the Anchor which did the dammage was a whole
anchor and not broken. And this deponent heard that after the  Anchor
was weighed upp from the place where she receyved her wound, and
was removed a little distance from thence she sunke againe and in
her second sinking happened to fall neere a loose broken Anchor, which
was afterwards as this deponent hath credibly heard taken upp [?XXX]
the bough of the Abraham. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .4. Interrogatory he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .5. he saith that heavy vessells falling upon Anchors some[?times]
it happens that the vessells breake the Anchors, and some tymes that
the flooke of such Anchors peirce the sides of the vessells. and
otherwise saving his foregoing depositions he cannot depose

To the .6. he saith the Anchor which did the dammage in question was
fastened to a Cable which said Cable was fatned to the [?fore?XX]
of the sayd shipp Supply. And further he cannot depose

To the 7. Interrogatorie This deponent saith he saw some of the [?beds] interrogated
opened after the dammage, and saw severall bookes being the bookes
interrate in a box after the foresayd dammage wett and spoyled And
saith he saw severall Chests wherein sugar had beene, which were
light and empty the sugar thereof being as it seemes wasted and
consumed in the water. And saith the dammage aforesayd was done
by that anchor of the Supply which lay to the Northward of the
Supply. And otherwise he cannot depose

Thomas ffetteplace [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.49r Annotate
P.P.

The fifth day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Lewellyn Austen and others against Powell)
Clements. Suckly.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd
Powell.

1.

John Lacy of the parish of Saint Mary Maudlin in the County
of Surrey Mariner, aged sixty three yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined, deposeth and saith as followeth.

Powell dt.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that he
hath knowne the arlate shipp the Hopewell whereof Henry Powell was master
for two yeares now past and upwards, and saith the sayd Henry Powell for
and during the whole voyage in controversy was Owner and Proprietor of
one eighth part of the sayd shipp the Hopewell (which was lost in the
sayd voyage) and did sett forth his sayd eighth part as a ffreighter and
Adventurer upon the sayd voyage, and when the sayd shipp ws taken the
same Powell did loose one full eighth part with the sayd Lewellin
Austen Mackrell and Jauncey, the premisses he knoweth being Gunner
of the sayd shipp the voyage in question, and having seene the deed of
ffreightment. And otherwise cannot depose

To the second and third he saith that the sayd Henry Powell was by the Joynt
consent of the rest of the Owners Lewellin Austin and others appoynted
master of the sayd shipp the voyage in question, and had besides his sayd
eighth part of the shipp a good quantity of goods aboard upon his owne Accompt
and Clothes Instruments and other things of good value, and allso one 8th
part of the proceed of the Negroes brought from Guiney, of the value of 250 li
sterling. All which were absolutely lost by the seizure of the sayd shipp, which
this deponent knoweth being one of her Company the voyage in question, And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth fifth and sixth articles This deponent saith that
the sayd shipp the Hopewell arrived att Antego the 14th day of October 1652
and not before, and upon the .15. and 16th dayes of the sayd moneth the sayd
shipp wanting repaires in her wailes was careened and amended, by some of
the shipps Copany and her Master, and others went a shoare to Cutt wood to stowe
the sugars being a necessary worke, and saith the .17.th day being the
Sabbath there was noe worke done, and upon the .18.th day of the sayd month the
shipp Hopewell was haled aboard the Recovery arlate, and the Company of
the Hopewell cast out her ballast to make roome for the sugars, and tooke aboard
some of the Recoveryes gunnes,
And upon the 19th day tooke in the rest of the Recoveries gunnes and
stowed them in the Hopewell, And upon the 20th day (being the soonest
that possibly that worke could be done) did begin to take the sugar and other goods
out of the Recovery into the Hopewell, and used all possible endeavour from
the tyme so farr as nature and strength in that hot Clymate might
of could endure to dispatch that worke with the greatest speed that might
be, which this deponent knoweth being all the sayd tyme present and assisting
att and in the busines and worke aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.49v Annotate
To the seventh article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that from the sayd [?XX]
day to the 30th of October 1652 the sayd Company of the Hopewell did
their utmost endeavour to lade the goods of the Recovery into the Hopewell but
saith the Caske was so faulty and worke so great and season so hot that it
could not be effected howbeit severall of the Mariners did hurt and [?surfet]
with excessive toyle ad labour. And saith that before all the Recoveryes
lading was or could be taken out of her videlicet upon the sayd 30th day of the
sayd month, the arlate Prince Rupert with the ship Swallow with 46 brasse
Gunnes and a frigott with 12 gunnes having neere 400 men with him came
up to Antego and seized the ffort thereof, and the same day seized the sayd two
shipps Hopewell and Recovery and goods in them respectively. And he rweally
beleiveth that by reason of the great strength the sayd Prince so came att [?her]
with, and the suddenness of his so comeing all the Inhabitants of Antego or
any present helpe that could then have been got together could not have
hindred the sayd seizure and surprizall, the premises he knoweth being then
present att the sayd seizure and seeing and observing the passages aforesaid
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the eighth article he saith there was a good quantity of sugar and other things in
the Recovery att the tyme of seizure and after three dayes this deponent saw
her turned a float by Prinnces Ruperts men, and after the sayd Prince left
Antegofound that the sayd Princes men had taken out all the goods and
lading that were in the Recovery as aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the ninth article of the sayd allegation he saith of his certaine knowledge and sight
the lading of the Recovery which was wracked att Antego, was sugars in Caskes
and loose ginger and other goods, and saith the sayd goods were very troublesome
to get out and the Casks much broken in somuch that the sayd Powell beside
the helpe of his owne men was forced of the certaine knowledge of this deponent
to hire a Cooper att Antego att the rate of 30 pound of Tobacco per day to assist
att the heading of the casks and other Coopers worke necessary for the
preservation of the sayd sugars and goods. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .10th. and 11th he saith that whilest the sayd goods were a taking into the Hopewell
as aforesayd there was a Spanish vessell cast away upon the Rocke att
Barbados about 8 leagues distance from Antego, and saith there came
some Spaniards to Antego in their boat to desire helpe for preservation of
severall persons lives in danger to be cast away upon the Rockes, whereupn
the sayd henry Powell for the preservation of the lives of the sayd persons and
for the furnishing the shipp Hopewell with pitch which he stood in great
want of, of which he heard there was a good quantity in the sayd Spanish
shipp tooke his boat and four men in the same and noe more, and thereby saved
and preserved the lives of 13. of the sayd persons in danger to be lost, and [?saved]
a good quantity of pitch, and in case he had not bene deprived
of his ayd shippe by Prince Rupert as aforesayd might have gayned a very
considerable freight for the carryeing of the aforesayd persons so saved and
some of their goods to [?Partincoe] which was in the way of the shipp Hopewells
returne home. And the benefit thereof would have returned to the [?XX]
Advantage of the Owners of the sayd shipp; And verily beleiveth the premisses
were so done by the sayd Powell not for any sinister or by end of his owne. And
otherwise cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.50r Annotate
To the twelfth and thirteenth articles of the sayd allegation Hee saith and deposeth
that the sayd Henry Powell in the premisses did as this deponent conceyveth
as became a Christian man in charity and a prudent man to doe and left
behind him .16. men to worke in the unlading of the Recoveryes goodes amnd
new stowing them in the Hopewell, and att his goeing to Barbados
gave them expresse order to ply the sayd worke, and the sayd .16. neb did
ply their worke accordingly with their utmost dilience this deponent seeing and observing the same and beleiveth
they did asmuch as if the sayd Powell and his other 4 men had bene with them
and that incase they had bene all ymployed in the sayd worke they could
not have performed it before the seizure of the sayd shipps by Prince
Rupert as aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourteenth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith and deposeth that the
sayd Henry Powell did stay with the sayd shipp, till the 28th day of
October 1652. videlicet till within two dayes of the seizure thereof, and kept his
men so hard att worke to gett the aforesayd goods out of the Recovery into the
Hopewell that diverse of his Company did in the hearing of this deponent
complayne that he would kill them with excessive labour, and the sayd Powell
himselfe of the sight of this deponents did in his owne person take great paines therein,
and helped to unlade and relade the sayd goods neglecting noe tyme
or care in the doeing thereof. And othrwise cannot depose.

To the fifteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for ought he
knoweth or could observe the sayd henry Powell did not att any tyme
leave his shipp otherwise than as aforesayd or neglected any tyme in fishing
or about other busines, howbeit he saith he did within the sayd tyme
severall nights spend about an howre or two and not more in casting the
nett for Tutrles, which he saith was a convenient and usefull provision
for the shipps Company and done towards night onely, and after such
tyme as he had so rdered every mans worke and busines, that noe tyme
was thereby lost, the premisses this deponent knoweth being present and seeing
and taking notice thereof.

To the sixteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath knowne
the arlate henry Powell for theis 20 yeares now past and for all the
sayd tyme the sayd Powell hath bene a Master of a shipp and hath had
the reputation of honest able diligent and Industrious Seaman in the
discharge of his office and Trust, and one that hath bene observed to
be very diligent in keeping his men to their worke, and carefull and
conscientious in paying them heir wages, and somuch this deponent
having often sayled in Company with him hath seene and observed
by him and for his part never saw observed or heard and thing to
the Contrary. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes.

To the first he saith he understandeth well the nature of an Oath and the danger
of periury. And saith the shipp Hopewell arrived att Antego upon the .14. day
of October 1652. and was seized by Prince Rupert the 30th day of the
same moneth after she had there bene 16. dayes.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.50v Annotate
To the 2d he saith hee ill lying of the shipp Recovery by reson of her wreck
the ill quality of the Casks wherein the sugars were putt, and the season
of the yeare, and unseasonableness of the Climate att that tyme [?considered]
the master and Company of the Hopewell using their utmost diligence and
endeavour might have taken in all her lading she was to take in att
Antego in 20 dayes and not in lesse tyme as he verily beleiveth. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third he saith that some of the sayd shipps Company upon the 15th
and 16th dayes of October 1652 and not after did goe a shoare to cutt wood
for the necessary stowing of the sugars. and the sayd Master upon the sayd
2 dayes sett a nett for turtles or tortoises and in setting the same and
afterwards taking them up spent about 2 howres and not upward. and
after the sayd 2. dayes the sayd master once and noe after sett the
sayd nett of tortoises and therein spent about one houre and not more
and severall tymes afterward caused 2 ship boyes to sett and draw the
sayd nett, and saith they sett the same about sunset in the evening
and tooke the same upp before sunrising in a morning, and therein spent
about a dozen howres and noe more, and saith none of the sayd tyme was
as he beleiveth spent wastfully but very profitably for necessary
supply of provisions. Ans saith about .7. of the Company went to cutt wood
as aforesayd and he for his part knoweth not of any hunting at all in
the sayd voyage att Antego nor of any fishing or hawling of turtles
otherwise than as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth he saith that the sayd master upon the 28th day of October 1652
videlicet 2 dayes before the seizure tooke his boat and four of his Company
in her videlicet Henry Musset, John Griggs Robert ffarney, and James Lawry
and staid out about 4 dayes that is to say from thursday night att 20 [?XX] the
lock till Tuesday morning next ensuing. and otherwise referring
himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith there was Company and helpe enough for the receiving
the sayd lading aboard as fast as the Coopers could fitt the casks, and all
possible diligence was used as aforesayd in the worke, and it could not be
done in lesse tyme than it was, and saith that considering the want of
Coopers to fitt the Casks there was constantly as many hands attt worke
as could usefully be imployed, And saith in case there had bene want
of men yet partly in regard of the season of the yeare for planting and
partly for sicknes then in the Countrey there could not have bene any
sufficient men there procured to worke a shipboard. and further otherwise
than negatively cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith the sayd shipp was seized by Prince Rupert upon the
20th day of October 1652. And the sayd Powell and those that went with
him to the Barbooda Islands were not then returned from the sayd Barbooda
Islands to the sayd ship the Hopewell.

To the .7.th he saith he verily beleiveth in his conscience that in case all
the diligence that might be had bene used by the sayd Powell and all his
Company the saayd Hopewell could not have bene Loaden and gone
from Antego beore the tyme she was seized by Prince Rupert.

To the .8. negatively for the reasons aforesayd whereto he referreth himselfe

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.51r Annotate
To the 9th he saith the sayd shipp the Hopewell and her Companie made
three shott against Prince Rupert, but the shipp Recovery m,ade none
howbeit he saith some of the Company of the Recovery with the assistance
of some of the Hopewells Company with powder and shott which they had
out of the Hopewell made three shot out of the ffort att Antego. And otherwise
he cannot depose, saving he saith he was present aboard when the Hopewell
shott and made one of the sayd shotts himselfe

To the .10.th he saith that knowing all care was used in the premisses that became
men to use he beleiveth that the sayd shipp and her lading was not lost
by reason of the sayd Powells departing his shipp or absenting himselfe
from the same as aforesayd, nor by reason of any negligence in the Mariners
thereof or any of them. And saith he beleiveth the sayd shipp and her
ladeing was worth about six thousand pound sterling. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

Top the .11.th he saith that the very day before the seizure of the sayd shipp
and not before this Rendent heard that Prince Rupert had taken the frigot
interrate, and the same day he heard the same contradicted; and heard that
the sayd Prince was about the Virgin Islands att the tyme the sayd shipp
Hopewell was att Antegop. And heard not of any dutch man of warr
in those Coasts. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 12. he saith that about halfe and howre before the seizure all the
Company of the Hopewell for safety of their lives and Libertyes
departed the sayd shipp. and otherwise referring himselfe to his foregoeing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the .13.th he saith the sayd shipp Hopewell came to Antego on purpose
to receyve the lading that was aboard the Recovery, and for noe other
lading, and saith there was men aboard her enough and sufficient for a
merchants shipp of her burthen, and they with the helpe of the Recoveries men might have laden her in
20 dayes as he beleiveth and not in a lesser tyme, which he beleiveth for
the reasons aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith he was Gunner of the Hopewell att the tyme of seizure
and was aboard the sayd shipp till Prince Ruperts shipp came within [?halfe]
shott, and his frigot within pistoll shott of the Hopewell, and att the very
tyme of her seizure was with others of his shipps Company flying away
in the long boat for preservation of life and liberty from Prince
Rupert and his men who persued them, and saith he is neither promised
nor hath receyved any thing for his deposition in this cause, nor hath bene
taught or instructed to depose therein by Captaine Powell, and hath had
severall ordinary and familiar discourses with him since his production
as a witnes, and not otherwise, and saith the sayd Powell hath severall
tymes promised this deponent to pay him his wages due for the voyage
in question so farr as his shares of an eighth part amounts to, and saith
he doth not sue the [?sayd] Austin for his wages, but beleiveth that the sayd
Powell as master of the sayd shipp doth sue the sayd Austin and the
rest of the Owners for the wages due to this Rendent and the rest of
the Company of the sayd shipp; And otherwise negatively

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.51v Annotate
To the .15.th he saith there was spent about the shipp Hopewell after
she went from Barbadoes to Antego three Chests of pitch or thereabouts,
and saith she was in such want of Pitch that her Company waa forced
to boyle their tarr into Pitch for her necessary supply. And saith there
was noe pitch to be had att Antego, the premisses he knoweth being present
att Antego and seeing and knoweing the premisses. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the 16th he saith he spent two dayes in the Cutting of wood for the
use of the ship as aforesayd and was never a fishing or
hawling of Turtles, And beleiveth that there were abouy 12 turtles
eaten aboard the Hopewell by the Company thereof and that every
Turtle yeilded provision sufficient for two meales for the shipps Company
or thereabouts. And saith he knoweth the premisses, and his sayd foregoeing
depositions to be true being one of the shipps Company the voyage
in question, and present and seeing and observing the passages predeposed
and for the reasons exprest for his knowledge in the particulars
whereto he referreth himselfe, and otherwise cannot depose./

To the .17. he saith he beleeveth that Captaine Powell was att the Barbooda
Islands att the tyme of the sayd seizure and his four men as aforesayd with
him, and he was aboard her the [?28th] day of October 1652 and not
afterwards, and beleiveth he had noe order to Plunder att the Barboodas
and saith Captaine Swift and four of his men went also to the Barboodas,
and the sayd Swifts men were bound to worke in the Lading of the Hopewell
as he beleiveth; and beleiveth there was none of the Mariners of the
Hopewell aboard her att thye tyme of seizure. and further cannot depose.

To the .18.th he saith he spent two dayes in the Cutting of wood for the
use of the shipp Hopewell as aforesayd and was never a fishing or
hawling or Turtles, And beleiveth that there were about 12 turtles
eaten aboard the Hopewell by the Company thereof and that every
Turtle yeilded provision sufficient for two meales for the shipps Company
or thereabouts. And saith he knoweth the premisses, and his sayd foregoeing
depositions to be true being one of the shipsp Company the voyage
in question, and present and seeing and observing the passages predeposed
and for the reasons exprest for his knowledge in the particulars
whereto he referreth himselfe, and otherwise cannot depose.

John Lacey [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the)
three Judges.
----
The thirteenth day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2.

Edward Best of Lymehouse in the County of Middlesex mariner
late Boatswayne of the shipp Hopewell whereof Henry
Powell was master aged four and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
arlate Henry Powell being a partowner of the sayd shipp the Hopewell was
by and with the Consent of the rest of the Owners appoynted Captaine master
or Commannder of her the voyage in question, and had and lost in her when
she was taken by Prince Rupert, over and besides one eighth part of the sayd [?shipp]
and one eighth part of the Proceed of Negroes brought from Guinnet, a [?great]
and considerable Adventure upon his owne private accompt, the value of
which sayd losses this deponent knoweth not and otherwise cannot depose ([?of]
he knoweth the premisses being boatswayne of the sayd shipp the voyage in question
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.52r Annotate
To the fourth fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
sayd shipp the Hopewell arrived att Antego the 14th day of October 1652 being
thursday and not before, and upon the 15th and 16th dayes of the sayd moneth the sayd
Powell and some of his Company did careene and doe necessary repaires in the
wayles of the sayd shipp and putt in severall peices of new timber, to make the
shipp stanch and tight. and others of the shipps Company next a shoare to cutt
wood for the stoweage of the Casks being a necessary worke; and upon the .18th
day being munday hauled the Hopewell to the side of the Recovery and removed
some of her sugars that came in her from the barbadoes, that they might come att
the ballast, and then heaved out her ballast and tooke out some of the gunnes
of the Recovery into the Hopewell, and upon the 19th day tooke out the rest
of the Gunnes and stowed them in the Hopewell. And saith that during the
sayd 14. 15. 16. 18 and 19. dayes the sayd Powell and company applyed themselves
carefully to their worke and busines and neglected noe tyme nor advantage
and having so disposed of the sayd necessary preparatory worke which could not have
bene done sooner by them upon the 20th day of the sayd moneth did begin to take
the sugar and other goods out of the Recovery into the Hopewell, and did
use their utmost endeavours and make all convenient speed they could to unlade
the Recovery, and neglected noe opportunity but applyed themselves to their
worke and ymployment withall care and diligence, the premisses he knoweth
being present att and engaged in the sayd worke and ymployment together
with the rest of the Hopewells Company. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the seventh Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
upon the thirtyeth day of the sayd moneth of October and whilest the sayd vessell
the Hopewell did lye by the side of the Recovery taking in the goods aforesayd
and before she [?could] have receyved in all the sayd goosd and lading the
arlate Prince Rupert ddid come suddenly att Antegoe aforesayd with the
shipp the Swallow having 41. brasse gunnes in her, and another  frigot with
12 gunnes both of them having in them 400 men or thereabouts, and
did by force seize the ffort att Antego and afterwards upon the same day
the sayd ship the Hopewell and the goods in her, and the shipp REcovery
and the goods laden in her and still remaining aboard her, And he
saith the force of the sayd Prince was so much that no resistance might
or could then have bene made by the Companies of eyther or both of the sayd shipps
or by the Inhabitants of Antegoe to prevent or hinder the seizure of the sayd
shipps and their respective lading, which he knoweth and beleiveth being
then present att Antwgoe and seeing and knoweing the premisses. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the eighth and nynth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the sayd Prince upert and his men tooke out all the sugars and other goods remaineing
aboard the Recovery, but how much tyme they spent in so doeing he knoweth
not. And saith that the goods of the Recovery were for the most part sugars
in Casks and loose ginger, and were very difficult and troublesome to be unladen
and the Casjs of the sayd sugars were deayed and out of order and the goods
thereof in unlading came out, so as the sayd Henry Powell was forced to
hire a Cooper att Antegoe to assist his owne Cooper aboard for the necessary
making upp of the sayd Casks. all which this deponent being present att
Antegoe well knoweth to be true. And otherwise cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.52v Annotate
To the tenth and eleventh Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
there being a shipp cast away or splitt about the Barboodes being 8
or 10 leagues from Antegoe the aforesayd Henry Powell did take his
shipps boat with four men in her and att his returne brought
some Spaniards with him which he preserved from perishing in the sayd
shipwrack. and saith there was att that tyme great want of pitch
aboard the Hopewell and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the twelveth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd Henry Powell
before he went to the Barboodas was very carefull and diligent
in getting the goods and ladeing out of the Recovery and when he
went left 15 or 16 men aboard and gave them order to ply their worke
and be carefull of their busines. which this deponent being present there
knoweth to be true. And otherwise cannot depose saving he heard
the sayd Captaine Powell speake of the great want of pitch aboard
the Hopewell and knoweth that he brought pitch with him from the sayd
shipwrackt shipp att the Barboodaes. and other cannot depose.

To the thirteenth he saith that that in case the sayd Powell and the four men he
tooke with him to Barboodas had bene att Antegoe att the tyme of seizure
of the sayd shipps by Prince Rupert as aforesayd they could not with the
assistance of others of the sayd shipps Company or other helpe from Antegoe
have preserved the sayd shipps in any [?humaine] probability; neyther
could they have gotten the goods out of the Recovery into the Hopewell
and have stowed them in an orderly way with the assistance of the rest of
the Companyes of the Recovery and Hopewell before the sayd seizure
was made which he knoweth for that the sayd goods were so difficult to
unlade the casks so much out of order and the worke so over great in
proportion to the Company that were to doe it and the tyme wherein it
was to have bene done to have bene so preserved from the seizure
aforesayd and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
Henry Powell did both in his owne person and in his inciting and stirring
upp his Company to worke, use as much care and diligence as became
any man to doe in like case of the certaine knowledge and observation
of this deponent. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifteenth article of the ayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd
Captaine Powell did fish for and take some turtles att Antegoe being a good
food and provision and to the good benefitt of his Owners in saving of
other provisions, and otherwise saving his subsequent depositions
he cannot depose.

To the sixteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath knowne
the arlate Powell for 8 yeares or thereabouts and for all that tyme and
many yeares before he hath bene a master of a shipp. and hath ever had
the reputation of an honest diligent and industrious man in his ymployment
and trust. and somuch this deponent hath observed by him, and for his
part never saw or heard any thing to the Contrary and otherwise he
cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.53r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he well knoweth and considereth the danger of periury and
saith the Hopewell arrived att Antegoe upon a thursday being as he taketh
it the 14. of October. and continued there 16 dayes before she was taken
by Prince Rupert. which he knoweth being one of her Company, and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith that the sayd Henry Powell and the Mariners of the Hopewell
in case they had constantly wrought and done their dutyes might have
laden the Recoveries goods aboard the Hopewell in .12.
dayes as he beleiveth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith that about 12 of the Hopewells Company spent two
dayes and noe more in cutting of wood being a necessary worke. And
saith that the sayd Powell went severall tymes to haule turtles but how
often he knoweth not, and about 2 or three of the shipps Company spent
as he taketh it after the three first dayes, and hower or two every day
and not more in hawling the sayd turtles and therein spent during
the tyme they stayd att Antego summing upp all the howres together
about one day or 24 howres and not more as he beleiveth and as for
any other fishing or hunting he knoweth not. and knoweth the premisses
being one of the sayd shipps Company and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4 he saith that on or about the 28th day of October 1652 and in the night
of the same day the interrate Powell tooke four men of the Hopewells Company
in a small shallop of five tonnes and went with them as this Rendent hath
heard to the Barbiidas, and returned not agayne to the Hopewell till about
the third or 4th day of November following having bene so absent from
his shipp five or six dayes or thereabouts. And otherwise cannot depose
saving he knoweth the premisses for the reasons aforesayd.

To the .5. he saith that in case there had bene more men aboard the Hopewell
to worke if that the sayd Powell and the 4 men that went with him to the Barboodas
had stayed aboard the Hopewell she might have taken in her lading in
lesse tyme than she did, or could doe without them, but not before the
comeing of Prince Rupert as he beleiveth without extraordinary
helpe, and saith that men were very scanty att Antegoe, and it being
then the planting tyme there, he doth not know whether the sayd Powell
could have procured any helpe and assistance of men or noe. and
otherwise negatively and further cannot depose.

To the .6. he saith that the sayd shipp Hopewell and her ladeing was seized
by Prince Rupert upon a Saturday being the 31th day of October 1652
and att that tyme the sayd Powell was absent from her and she destitute
of a Master. which he knoweth being then att Antegoe. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .7. he saith he doth not beleive in his conscience that in case the sayd
Powell with all the Company belonging to the sayd shipp had continued
aboard her and done their dutyes in her as they hought to have done, she
had or could probably have bene laden and goen from Antegoe before
the tyme she was seized by Prince Rupert, referring himselfe to the
Reasons aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .8. he referrs himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and the reasons
therein deduced, and otherwise negatively.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.53v Annotate
To the .9. he saith that the shipp Recovery had noe gunnes nor did or could make
any Resistance, nor the Company of her saving that this Rendent with the helpe
of some of them made a shot from the ffort. and knoweth that there were
severall shotts made by the Hopewell and her Company against the sayd Prince Ruperts shipp
being then present and seeing and hearing the same. and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 10th he saith he knoweth not the value of the Hopewell and her lading
and knoweth that the sayd shipp and her lading were not lost by any
neglect of the sayd Powell or Company or by reason of any deserting
of her, but by force and power of Prince Rupert and his men as aforesayd
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .11. he saith that the frigot interrate was with Prince Rupert att the tyme
of the seizure interrate, but this deponent before that tyme did not heare that the sayd Prince
had seized the sayd frigot or any other vessells in those parts. and otherwise
cannot depose, saving he heard that the sayd Prince was amongst the
Virgin Islands.

To the .12. he saith the Hopewells men stayd in her as long as here was any
hope of saving their shipp. videlicet till Pirnce Ruperts men forcd them
out both by sea and land with small shott, and beleiveth that one
or 2 of her Company were aboard her att the very tyme of seizure and
not more. And otherwise to this Interrogatory saving his foregoeing
depositions whereto he referreth himselfe he cannot depose.

To the .13. he saith the sahipp Hopewell came to Antego on purpose to take in
the Lading of the Recovery, and beleiveth that. 30 men might
have taken in the sayd Lading in .10. dayes, and that the Master and
Company of the Hopewell being 21 in all incase they had constantly
wrought and bene all in perfect health and had had continually good
weathe rmight have taken in the sayd lading in .12. dayes as he
hath before deposed. And saith the Hopewells men were some of them
infirme and ill,
and a good parte of the tyme the sayd goods were taken into the Hopewell
the weather proved wet so as the men could not labour above deck upon
sugars and such like lading which he knoweth being then present
in and att the sayd worke, and otherwise cannot depose

To the .14. he saith he was one of the Hopewells Company, and being forced
out of her with small shott was att the tyme of her seizure flyeing for
his lyfe and liberty toward the shoare, and is not promised nor expects
to receyve or hath receyved any thing for his deposition in this cause
nor hath bene instructed to depose by Captaine Powell or any body else,
and hath had noe discourse with the sayd Powell since his production
for a witnes, save ordinary and common discourse and now eay relating
to this busines, and saith the sayd Powelll promised this Rendent his wages
when he went out of England upon the voyage in queation but not since
and saith he the sayd Powell in behalfe of this Rendent and others
sues the sayd Austin for wages due to the Mariners in the voyage
and saith he expects noe reward from the sayd Powell for [?testimony]
in this cause.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.54r Annotate
To the 15. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .16. he saith he was boatswaine of the Hopewell when she was seized
and was escaped out of her for his life before she was seized about three
or foure minutes of an houre and not more as he beleiveth, and was flying
in the boat for life and Liberty. and otherwise cannot depose

To the .17. he saith that Captaine Powell was aboard the sayd shipp the 28th day of
October 1652 and not after as he beleiveth, and saith the sayd Powell carryed
4 men to the Barboodas and the sayd Swift about 4 or 5 more. and beleiveth
that Swifts men were bound to assist att the unladeing of the Recovery, and
Powells men att the ladeing of the Hopewell. and beleiveth that one or
two mariners of the Hopewell were aboard and taken and seized in her
and otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the .18th he saith he this Rendent w as a cutting of wood 2. dayes, and
was hawlling of turtles about halfe a dozen tymes and spent therein about
12 howres. and saith severall Turtles were eaten aboard the Hopewell
by the shipps Company but how many he remembreth not. and otherwise
he cannot depose saving he was present att the eating of the sayd
Turtles.

Edward [?Best] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Doctor Godolphin.)
----
The one and twentyeth day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Henry Powell and Company et cetera against)
Valentine Austin et cetera for wages.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

James Thomas of Poplar in the County of Middlesex
Mariner late Steward of the shipp the Hopewell whereof
the sayd Henry Powell was master aged eight and
twenty yeares a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponents aith and deposeth that of the
certaine knowledge of this deponent in the yeares 1651 and part of the
yeare 1652 the arlate Henry Powell was appoyted and did goe master
of the sayd shipp the Hopewell for a voyage from this port of London
to the Parts of Guinney and from thence to the Barbadoes, and that all
and singular the Mariners hereafter mentioned were hyred and did soe
in the sayd shipp that is to say, the sayd Henry Powell, Richard Stademan
Edward Best, John Lacy, John ffarington, Henry Mussel, James Lowry
Robert ffarney John Griggs, Anthony Good, Simon ffluends, Thomas [?MiXXes]
Richard Ward the elder, Richard Ward the younger, Nathaniel Wade, John
Smith, Thomas Millard, Thomas Stadinan Roger Jones, Roger Hickes
James Edwards, Henry Miles, Samuel Dibell John Hosier ffrancis Chapman
Richard Thaxstone Richard Canon (who was hired at the Barbadoes in September 1652) and this deponent being the very
persons schedulate and verily beleiveth that the sayd respective persons
were hired att the respective monethly wages in the sayd schedule to the allegation
annexed this deponent onely excepted and in particular saith that the persons hereafter mentioned
were to have the respective wages following, that is to say the sayd Roger Jones [?TyX]
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.54v Annotate
of the satd shipp 60 s per moneth. and this deponent 32 s per moneth and
the sayd Robert Steedman Carpenter as himselfe told this deponent
53 s per moneth. and the sayd Henry Powell as this deponent hath heard
7 li per moneth. And saith he knoweth the premisses being Steward of
the sayd shipp for part of the voyage in question. And otherwise cannot
depose [#]

[#] [LH MARGIN, AT 90 DEGREES]
savig ge saith that the sayd Powell and all the sayd Mariners (except Richard Cannon) entred into pay about .9. October 1651. and continued in the sayd shipp and service thereof as followeth. videlicet the sayd
Henry Powell. Richard Studemans. [?Thomas] Best. John Lacy. John ffarington. Henry Musset James Lowry Robert fferrey. John Griggs. Anthony Joad. Simon fflatends. Thomas Miles. Richard Ward [?junior]
Nathaniel Wade. John Smith. Thomas Millard. Thomas Studiman Roger Jones Roger Hickes and this deponent. till about the latter end of September 1652. of this deponents certaine knowledge
and saith the sayd shipp about that tyme with all the last mentioned persons (this deponent onely excepted who stayd att the Barbadoes) departed from Barbadoes towards Antego. And saith the
rest of the sayd mariners continued in the sayd service as followeth. videlicet. Richard Ward Senior, till about .9. April. 1652. James Edward till about 30. March. 1652. Henry Miles till about 26. March 1652
Samuell [?Bibett] till about 25. Marc. 1652. John Hosier till about 9. April .1652. and ffrancis Chapman till. about 29. March .1652. and Richard Thaxton. till about 25. April .1652. and that Richard Canon was
shipped and entred into pay in September. 1652 att the Barbadoes; And beleiveth that the sayd John Lacy was hired and served at 45 s per moneth. Roger Hickes att 43 s per moneth: Edward Best. John farrington and John Grigg each
att 38 s per moneth. Samuel Bibet att 36 s per moneth: John Smith att 36 s per moneth. James Lowrt and Robert fferney each at 32 s per moneth Simon [?ffrends] and Nathaniel Wade each att 30 s per moneth: Anthony Goad att 36 s per moneth Richard
Waard Junior and Thomas Stedmane att 15 s per moneth: each of them. and Thomas Millard att 34 s per moneth.
James Thomas [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGRESS]

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp did goe forth in the sayd employment, and the sayd Powell
and Mariners did enter into whole pay upon or about the nynth
day of October 1651, and did carry in her a good quantity of
goods in Iron, Copper Mamillias, wollen Cloth Linnen Cloth strong
water Brandewyne and other goods, and therewith sayled and
safely arrived to the parts of Guinny, and the sayd Valentine Austin
did then goe Supercargo or Cape merchant in the sayd shipp the
sayd voyage, and had the order and disposeing of the sayd goods
so carryed out, and that such goods as the sayd Austin thought fitting
were safely delivered and disposed in Guinnet, and saith by the
order of the sayd Austin severall Negroes were bought and taken
into the sayd shipp for and in leiw of the sayd goods, All which
this deponent knoweth to be true being one of the shipps Company in
the sayd voyage, and assisting the sayd Austin in disposeing the sayd
goods and buying the sayd Negroes, and well seeing and observing
the premisses to be as he hath now sett foorth. And otherwise hee
cannot depose./

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
the sayd shipp the Hopewell did sett sayle with the foresayd Negroes
and the remaining part of the goods carryed out to the Barbadoes
and did there safely arrive and delivered the sayd Negroes and ggoods
there, and the sayd shipp did there  arrive about the 9th of July 1652.
and saith that then and there the wages of the sayd Powell and his
sayd Marriners were due and ought to have beene payd unto them, and
this deponent did then and there heare the sayd Powell speake to the
sayd Austin touching the sayd Marriners wages and the payment thereof
And otherwise cannot depose saving that there was not any wages then
and there payd to them so farr as this deponent knoweth or hath heard

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith he cannot depose

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he this deponent
for his part hath not receyved his wages due for the sayd voyage but the
same are still deteyned by the sayd Valentine Austin, and the wages
due likewise to the foresayd Powell and all the rest of the Marriners
of the sayd shipp are likewise so deteyned as hee beleiveth and otherwise referring himselfe to the Acts of
this Court he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he well knoweth the danger of periury
and saith that being not att Antego the voyage in question he cannot
depose to this Interrogatory.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.55r Annotate
To the 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. and 13th Interrogatories he saith that being
not att Antego the voyage in question he knoweth nothing of the Contents
of theis Interrogatories nor any of them

James Thomas [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges in Court.
----
The 21th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Powell and others the Mariners of the)
Hopewell against Austin. Suckly Clements)

Examined upon an allegation given or made in the Acts
of Court on behalfe of the sayd Powell
and Mariners.

1

James Thomas of Poplar in the County of Middlesex Mariner
Late Steward of the sayd shipp the Hopewell for part of
the voyage in question, aged eight and twenty yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth.

That the severall and respective Mariners mentioned in a schedule in
this cause exhibited and particularly named in this deponents deposition
this day taken upon an arlate allegation in the same cause were as he
verily beleiveth hired by the sayd Henry Powell att and for the wages
schedulat this deponent onely excepted who was hired by him for
32 s per moneth And saith that the respective monethly wages in the
sayd schedule mentioned for Officers and Principall Marriners was
and is ordinarily given for such a voyage as that now in controversy
videlicet  from this Port of London to Guinney and from thence to the Barbadoes
videlicet 53 s per moneth to a Carpenter, in which imployment Richard Stedeman
schedulat was hired and served, and 38 s per moneth to a quarter master in which
ymployment Henry Masste Edward Best schedulat hired and served, and 45 s per moneth
to a Gunner in which place John Lacy schedulat was hired and served and 60 s
per moneth to a Chirurgeon in which place Roger Jones schedulat was hired
and served and 50 s per moneth to a Boatswayne in which office Richard
Ward schedulat was hired and served, and 55 s per moneth for a cheife
mate and Masters mate in which office or offices ffrancis Chapman and
Richard Cannon schedulat were hired and served. And saith that the
common rate for an ordinary  Mariner for such a voyage was and is 32 s per moneth
but he saith that att that tyme videlicet about October 1651. Mariners were
so scarse that 36 s per moneth was att that tyme an ordinary rate for such
a voyage and that  15 s per moneth is an ordinary rate for a youth or ships
Boy in such a voyage especially att that tyme. And he saith that the allegat
James Jauncey Peter Mackrell and Robert Lewellin were in the sayd
voyage oartowners of the sayd shipp and for and as such commonly accounted
reputed and taken but of what part of the sayd shipp and furniture
every of them was Owner he knoweth not, And saith he knoweth the
premisses now by him declared being one of the sayd shipps Company and
steward of her for part of the voyage in question, and was ymployed
by the sayd Henry Powell for the procuring of men to serve in the
sayd ship the voyage in question. And otherwise he cannot depose

James Thomas [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the)
Judges)
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.55v Annotate
The 25th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Lewellyn Austen and others against Powell.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3

Nathaniel Waade of Dowgate in the Citty of
London Mariner aged four and twenty yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath credibly
heard and beleiveth that the arlate Henry Powell was owner of one eighth
part of the sayd shipp the Hopewell which was lost in the voyage in question
and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd Henry
Powell was for the sayd voyage constituted and appoynted master of the sayd
shipp for the government thereof, by the Owners of the sayd shipp
which he knoweth being one of the Mariners of the sayd shipps
Company the voyage in question, and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Henry
Powell had in the sayd shipp Cloathes and necessaries, Sea Instruments
and his owne private adventure to a considerable value but knoweth not
the certainty there of, besides his eight part of the sayd shipp as aforesayd
and the proceed of the eight part of his Negroes brought from Guinny
amounting to the value of about four tonnes of sugar, All which
he the sayd Henry Powell did absolutely loose by the seizure of the sayd
shipp by Prince Rupert, which this deponent knoweth being one of the
Mariners of the sayd shipps Company and att that tyme the servant of
the sayd Henry Powll. And further cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
the Hopewell did arrive att Antego upon or about the 14th day of October 
1652, being thursday as he remembreth and not before. And saith
that upon the fifteenth and sixteenth dayes some of the Company of
the Hopewell went a shoare to cutt wood for the stoweing of the sugars
being a necessary worke. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about the beginning
of the next weeke after the arrivall of the Hopewell att Antego and upon
the 18 or 19th day of October as he remembreth the master and Company
of the Hopewell did hand the Hopewell to the side of the Recovery and
removed some of the sugars of the Hopewell, and cast out the ballast
thereof, and tooke the Recoveryes gunnes and stowed them in the Hopewell
which he knoweth being an eyewitnes of the premisses and otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that upon
the nynteenth or twentyeth day of the sayd moneth of October the tyme otherwise
he remembreth not, the sayd Powell and Company did beginn to take
the sugar and other goods out of the Recovery into the Hopewell.
And saith that in the Judgment and opinion of him this deponent the sayd
shipp the Hopewell could not sooner have bene fitted and made ready to
take in the sayd goods, And that the sayd Powel and Company did use their
utmost endeavour and make all convenient speed to unlade the sayd vessell
the Recovery and relade the sayd goods into the Hopewell, and neglected
noe opportunity to effect the same which he knoweth being then there present
And otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.56r Annotate
To the seventh article of the sayd allegation saith and deposeth, that
upon the thirtyeth day of October 1652. and whilest the Hopewell lay by the
side of the Recovery, and before she could in any probability have taken in
all her lading and beene fitted for her homeward voyage, the arlate Prince
Rupert did come upon the Coast of Antego aforesayd very suddenly with the
shipp Swallow having about 44 gunnes, and another frigott of 10 or 12
gunnes both well manned, and did first seize the ffort of Antegoe, and
upon the same day seized and surprized the Hopewell and goodes in her
and the shipp Recovery allso and goods in her, And saith that in all humane
probability there could noy eyther by the sayd shipps Companie or the Islanders
or both have any resistance bene made to preserve the sayd shipps and their
lading or eyther of them from being so seized by the sayd Prince
Rupert the sayd Prince Rupert was then so strong, and the strength of the
sayd Island and shipps so small and inconsiderable. and otherwise he
cannot depose saving that he was an eyewitnesse of the premisses.

To the .8.th article he saith That Prince Rupert and his men stayd att Antego
from the Saturday to the Tuesday following and did in that tyme unlade
the Remaynder of the sugars and goods in the Recovery. and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .9.th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the goods of the
Recovery were sugars in Casks and loose ginger, and the sayd goods
were as he saith troublesome and difficult to unlade, and many of the
heads of the sayd Casks in unlading and new stoweing them dropped
or fell out, by reason whereof the foresayd worke and employment of
lading the same into the Hopewell was much retarded. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 10 and 11th Articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that he heard it credibly reported some few dayes before the seizure of the
sayd shipp by Prince Rupert, that there was a Spanish vessell cast away
or shipwrackt neere to the Barboodas, and saith that the sayd Henry Powell
and some of his Company went to the Barboodas upon the sayd newes
or report. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 12th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Henry
Powell when he went to the Barboodas as aforesayd left about a dozen
men and 2 boyes to lade the Hopewell, and the sayd men so by him left did in his
absence diligently apply themselves to their worke in the lading of the
sayd shipp. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the .13th Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in case the sayd
Powell and all his Company had bene present att the tyme of the sayd seizure
they could not in this deponents Judgment in humane probability have [?preserved]
the sayd shipp the Hopewell from being taken by Prince Rupert, nor have
laded the sayd shipp with the goods of the Recovery so as she might have
bene gone from Antego before the sayd Prince came thither, which
he is firmly induced to beleive for that the sayd worke was too much and
difficult to be done by the sayd Powell and Company in so short a tyme, and
the sayd Powell and Company farr too weake to make any Resistance
against the sayd Prince. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 14th article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd Captaine Powell did during
the tyme he stayd att Antego cause his men to apply themselves diligently to
their worke. And otherwise he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.56v Annotate
To the fifteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Henry
Powell did during his stay att Antego sometymes goe to hawle Turtles
which were as he saith a very good food and provision of victualls for the
sayd shipps Company and very beneficial to the Owners and tending
to the preservation of other victualls; And saith he doth not know that he did
mispend and wast his tyme during his such stay att Antego. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the sixteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Henry
Powell hath by common report bene a Master of a shipp for many yeares
now past, And hath had and hath the reputation of a carefull and diligent
man in his busines and imployment of that nature. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first he saith he understandeth well the nature of an Oath and the
danger of periury; And saith the sayd shipp the Hopewell arrived
att Antego upon or about the 14th day of October 1652. and continued
there about 16 dayes before she was seized, which he knoweth being one
of her Companye.

To the second he saith that as he beleiveth the sayd Powell and his Mariners
applying themselves constantly to their work according to their duty
might have laden the Hopewell in twenty dayes, and not in lesse
tyme, which he knoweth for that the worke was too difficult and over
great to have bene performed by the sayd Powell and Company being
but about 16 men and two boyes. and otherwise negatively

To the third Interrogatorie He saith that about seven or eight of the Hopewells
Company did spend about two or three dayes in Cutting of wood by Captain
Powells order but not wastfully but for the necessary service of the
shipp, and saith that about two of the marriners or shipps boyes of the
Hopewell did upon severall dayes the number whereof he knowes not
hawle turtles , and the sayd Henry Powell sometymes went himselfe
but how often he knoweth not and beleiveth that in the hawling of turtles
there was spent in all the sayd severall tymes about 12 howres and not more, and saith the sayd
12 howres were not wastfully spent as he beleiveth being taken in the
morning or evening of the say, and the sayd Turtles by them caught
being an usefull food for the shipps Companie as aforesayd. And otherwise
he cannot depose, saving that he knoweth and beleiveth the foresayd premisses
being one of the Hopewells Company and present att Antego.

To the 4th Interrogatorie he saith that Captaine Powell aforesayd did about two
datyes before the seizure of the sayd shipp as aforesayd take four of his
shipps Company with him in a boat of 4 tonnes or thereabouts to the Island
of Barboodas. and saith he so went upon the wednesday night before
the seizure and returned back upon the Tuesday then next following
being the third day after the seizure. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the .5.th he saith that the sayd Powell and his Company if they had
continued constantly att worke might have laden the Hopewell in 20 days
and not lesse, and that more men might have done the sayd worke in
lesser tyme but in how much lesse he knoweth not. And saith he beleiveth
the sayd Powell might have hired men att Antegoe, but not Mariners
and further otherwise than negatively he cannot depose.

To the 6th Interrogatorie he saith the sayd shipp the Hopewell was seized by
Prince Rupert upon a Saturday Morning being the 30th day of October [?XXXX]
and saith the sayd Powell and Company that went with him to the Barboodas
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.57r Annotate
were not returned att that tyme to Antego, and saith the sayd shipp ws
then destitute of a master.

To the seventh Interrogatorie he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the eighth Interrogatory he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and otherwise he cannot depose, saving he saith that if the sayd Powell
had bene present when Prince Rupert came to Antegoe he might possibly
have saved some of the gould aboard the sayd shipp in case there were
any there, but whether there were any god aboard or noe he knoweth not.

To the ninth Interrogatory he saith the ship Recoverywas a ship wrackt shipp
and had noe gunnes in her and was not in a likely condition to resist Prince
Rupert nor did Resist him, and saith the Company of the Recovery and
some of the Hopewells Company made a shott against Prince Rupert from
the ffort, and the Hopewell made some shott likewise against him, but
all to noe purpose. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 10th Interrogatorye he saith the sayd shipp Hopewell and her lading
were as he beleiveth worth the summe of ten thousand pounds or
thereabouts att the sayd tyme of seizure and otherwise negatively.

To the 11th. Interrogatory he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 12. he saith he neyther knoweth nor beleiveth any the contents
of this Interrogatory saving his foregoeing depositions whereto he referres
himselfe.

To the 13th interrogatorye he saith the sayd shipp Hopewell came
to Antegoe to take in the Recoveryes lading and for noe other purpose
and saith that the shipp Hopewell was a shipp of 300 tonne, and
about 30 seamen had bene a sufficient number to mannage her
and so many she had when she went from this Port of London
and when she came to Antego she had but about 18 or 19 men many
of her Company being dead att Guiney and some stayed at Barbadas and saith that
thirty men might have laden her in about 18 dayes and not lesse
and nineteene men might have laden her in about 20 dayes
and not lesse. and beleiveth that if there had bene more men
they might have done the worke in lesse tyme, but doth not beleive
that she could have bene laden and goods well stowed in 5. 6. 7. or
8. dayes though therre had bene never so many men. and further he
cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith he was one of the Hopewells
Company att the tyme of her seizure, and was att the very tyme of
actuall seizing flying for his life in the shipps boat having stayd in
her so long as there was any hope of saving her, and till the sayd
Princes shipp was come to an anchor neere unto her, and
saith he this deponent doth not sue Valentine Austin for any
wages. and otherwise negatively. saving he hath spoken with
the producent since his being produced a witnesse in this cause
by way of ordinary and familiar discourse noe way relating to
the meritts and effects of this cause, and not otherwise.

To the 15th he saith he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.57v Annotate
To the .16th. he saith he was one of the Mariners of the Hopewells
Company and att the tyme the Prince men entred her was flying in
a boat for life and Liberty having bene parted from the sayd shippe
anout halfe a quarter of an howre before she was actually seized.
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 17 hee saith that the sayd Henry Powell was in the sayd shipp
the Hopewell upon the 27th of October att night and not afterwards
and saith the sayd night he went with 4 of his men to Barbadas
as also did Captaine Swift with 5 of his men, being in all about
11 persons, and saith there was onely one man
of the Hopewells aboard her att the tyme of seizure being taken
prisoner in her the rest being immediately before fledd out of
her for life and liberty And otherwise saving his foregoeing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the eighteenth Interrogatorie he saith he did not goe to cutt wood nor
hawle turtles during the stay of the shipp Hopewell att Antegoe
but saith he went twice a fishing during that tyme, and spent
therein about one howre and noe more. And saith there was about
halfe a dozen turtles eaten a shipboard by the Company of the
Hopewell, which he knoweth because he did partake thereof
himselfe. and otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated in Court
before the Judges/

Nath:ll Wade [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 28th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of Samuell [?Palvache] touching)
his Jewells)

6.

David Ben Mordeku of Morocco merchant aged
one and forty yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

That he this deponent came along as a fellow passenger with the sayd Samuell
[?Palcache] otherwise Jacob Carlos in the sayd shipp the Elias from Hamburg
in this present voyage wherein the sayd shipp with severall others in Company
with her was seized by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth, And saith
that about the tyme of the sayd seizure the foresayd [?Palvache] calling this deponent
to him and acquainted him that he the sayd [?Palvache] had a parcell of Jewells
and precious things which to preserve from plundering he intended to deliver
the Gunner of the Elias to hide for him, and thereupon produced a small
box covered with black leather and guilt, which being by him opened this deponent
saw severall Jewells and precious things therein and amongst the rest [?one]
diamond ring. one golden parrat covered over with Emerald stones, and one
golden Cockrell with a large pearle in the [?bunch] thereof, and other Jewells
which in particular he cannot specify; and the sayd box being shut againe
he the sayd [Palvache] taking some writings with him in his hand to [?XXX]
with the sayd box sayd he would deliver them to the sayd Gunner to hide [?XX]
lay upp for him, desiring this deponent to take notice what he had seene [?in]
the sayd little Chest r box; And saith that one Alderman was appoynted
to Command the sayd shipp the Elias on behalfe of the Captaine of the Elizabeth
frigat that made the seizure, And saith that toward [?night] of the same day
the sayd shipp Elias was brought to an anchor in the River of Thames And
the sayd Alderman in the hearing of this deponent called the Carpenter
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.58r Annotate
of the Elias to him into the great Cabbin of the shipp whither this deponent
attempting to foe in together with the sayd Carpenter was putt back by the sayd
Alderman, and the Cabbin doore shutt against him. And saith that after the
sayd Carpenter returned back out of the Cabbin which was about halfe an houre
this deponent asking the sayd Carpenter what they had bene doeing within he
replyed, that they videlicet the sayd Alderman and himselfe had bene in the Powder
roome uner the Cabbin, and that the sayd Alderman had there found and possest
himselfe of a guilded box or Chest and a booke and some writings which had bene
made upp in a Canvas bagg, or in words to the like effect, whereupon this
deponent fearing that the sayd Palvaches jewells were found stept immediately into the
sayd Cabbin and then and there saw the above mentioned little Chest or box wherein
the jewells of the sayd Palvache were as aforesayd in the hands of the sayd Alderman
together with some writings which writings and little box or Chest the
sayd Alderman then told this deponent he would carry to the Parliament or
to that effect. And further saith that the next morning this deponent saw the
sayd Alderman take the sayd little Chest or box and the sayd writings into his
hands and putt them in his pockett or under his Coat and goe off with the
same in a boat towards London, And saith that a youngman a servant of
the sayd Samuel; Palcache named John understanding and knoweing that
the sayd Alderman had his masters box attempted and endeavoured
to have gone along in the boat with the sayd Alderman but was not permitted
so to doe but deteyned and kept aboard the Elias by the English Mariners
aboard the sayd shipp.

[HEBREW TEXT] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges./
----
The 28th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

A busines of Examination of witnesses to perpetuity)
promoted by and on the behalfe of ffrancis ffawther)
Captaine of the shipp ffrancis of Scarborough)
against all persons whatsoever that will take)
upon them the justification and defence of)
the seizure of a Certayne shipp of fflushing)
whereof Cornelius Berghanaer was Master)
taken by the shipp ffrances (whereof the sayd)
ffauther is Captaine. Colequite)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd ffrancis ffawther.

Richard Pacock of Scarborough in
the County of Yorke Mariner master
of the sayd shipp the ffrancis aged three
and thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith the arlate shipp
the ffrancis about five monethes now past was sett out to sea in a warlike
expedition by the arlate ffrancis ffawther as a Private Man of warr
against the States of the united Provinces, the ffrench King and
their respective subiects and all others the Enemyes of this Commonwealth
and for that purpose was furnished with a Commission authorising the
same under the great seale of this Court issued out from hence by
vertue of a warrant from the right hpnourable the Councell of State
which he knoweth being Master of the sayd shipp and having seene
and heard the sayd Commission read. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that about the latter end of June or beginning of July last past in this
present yeare 1653. the foresayd ffrancis ffawther was Captaine and
Commander
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.58v Annotate
Commander and was and is the sole reputed Owner and Proprietor of the sayd
shipp the ffrancis her tackle and furniture, And saith that the sayd [?ffawther]
this deponent and Company of the sayd shipp the ffrancis did on or about the
sayd tyme upon the high and open seas and by vertue of the foresayd
Commission being then on board, take and seize a certaine shipp or vessell
belonging to fflushing in Zealand (whereof one Cornelius Berg[?haus]
was master) whom this deponent well knoweth to be an Inhabitant
of fflushing where he hath often seene him) of the burthen of sixty
tonnes or thereabouts. And moreover saith that the sayd ffawther
and shippes Company after seizure of the sayd prize were with their
sayd shipp ffrancis and the sayd Prize shipp by stresse of weather
forced into the Port of Ostend in fflanders, and there safely arrived
with both their sayd shipps, which he knoweth being master of the
Saint ffrancis and present aboard her the tyme aforesayd. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the third Article of the sayd allegation This deponent sayth that the sayd Captaine
ffawther after his arrivall att Ostend about the beginning oof July or
latter end of June was there seized upon by the Magistrates of Ostend
and kept and deteyned in prison for the space of 16. dayes or thereabouts
and the sayd two shipps were by the sayd Magistrates or their [?AXXXXX]
wreted out of his possession and the possession of this deponent and Company
and the sayd prize shipp of fflushing whereof the sayd Berghanaer] ws
Master was by the Court of Admiralty of Bridges in fflanders or some
other Court after some short tyme delivered or putt into the possession
of the sayd Berghenaer, and the sayd shipp the ffrancis is still kept
and detetyned att Ostend by the Magistrates thereof or other Officers of
the King of Spaine in fflanders, the premisses he knoweth being master
of the sayd shipp and comeing latelyfrom Ostend in fflanders [?where]
he saw the sayd shipps wrested and taken out of the sayd ffawthers hand[?s]
and the sayd ffauther imprisoned and the sayd prize released and shipp ffrancis
deteyned in manner predeposed. and otherwise cannot depose, saving
he saith that the sayd shipps were so taken from the sayd ffawther att[?Ostend]
by military power and Souldiers under the Commannd of some Magistrate
or Officer living att Ostend and by vertue of warrants and Order from
the Court of Admiralty of Bridges.

To the fourth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the foresayd
prize shipp or vessell whereof the sayd Cornelius Berghanaer was master [?was]
taken by the ffrancis as aforesayd att the tyme of her seizure att Ostend
by authority of the Admiralty of Bridges as aforesayd was with her [?tackle]
and apparrell and furniture of the cleare value of 200 li sterling and
somuch would have yeilded in ffanders England or elswhere and so much
this deponent would have given for her att that tyme. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith It is notorious [?there]
is and for many yeares past hath bene and in June and July last past
was a firme longe peace and amity between the King of Spaine and
the Commonwealth of England and there respective subiects, and that it has
bene and is lawfull. for the subiects of the King of Spaine or Commonwealth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.59r Annotate
of England together with their shipps and goods to arrive att any Port or Harbor
within the Dominions of the King of Spayne or the Commonwealth of England and
to depart with their sayd shipps and goods freely and quietly. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that there is a Recitall or
Clause in the foresayd Commission wherein It is expressed that the sayd ffawther
hath given bond of 3000 li. to the Keepers of the Liberty of England by authoruty
of Parliament to bring all such prizes as he should take by vertue of the
sayd Commission into some Port or Harbor of this Commonwealth, and to Judgment
in this Court or to that effect, which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that as he understood by
the sayd ffawther and as he verily beleiveth the sayd ffawther if he had not bene
hindred from so doeing att Ostend as aforesayd would have brought the sayd prize
shipp to the Port of Dover or some other Port of this Commonwealth. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation , This deponent saith that att the tyme of the
seizure of the sayd shipp ffrancis att Osetnd as aforesayd there was and remained
aboard her provisions Armes and ammunition for the use of the sayd shipp in her
sayd warlike expedition to the value of 30 li. sterling which he knoweth being
master of her as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation and papers therein mentioned This deponent saith that the sayd Captaine ffawther
hath by all faire and lawfull wayes in a legall manner endeavoured and
Requested the restitution of the sayd shipps the ffrancis and the sayd prize
shipp of and from the Judges and Officers and Ministers of Justice of the
sayd Towne of Bridges and Admiralty thereof And he saith that the sayd
Dutch papers to the allegation annexed and now shewne him were and are as he
verily beleiveth true Copies of the Proceedings had and made in the
sayd Court of the Admiralty of Bridges of and concerning the sayd
shipps and restitution thereof, the ground and reason of this deponents
beleife was and is for that he reeyved the sayd papers inclosed in severall
letters from the freind or Correspondent of the sayd ffawther att Bridges
who did sollicit the sayd busines in his behalfe, and the sayd letters (which
this deponent saw opened and heard read att Ostend whither they were directed
to the producent) did certify and sett forth that the foresayd papers now
shewne him were the proceedings had and made att Bridges in and
touching the business aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the tenth eleaventh and twelfth articles of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith
that the foreayd shipp of 60 tonnes taken by the ffrancis as aforesayd was
a shipp of fflushing belonging to the Subiects of the States of the
United Provinces and would have bene and proved prize if she had bene brough to
adiudication, and somuch the Master of her the sayd Berhenaer did
acknowledge and confesse. and saith the sayd ffowther in seeking
restitution of the sayd shipps hath expressed severall summes of money
of good value, and expended in and during his sayd imprisonment the summe
of 15 li. or thereabouts, and himselfe, and sayd shipps ffrancis Company
have otherwise suffered great dammage and losse which he is not able to
value. And further cannot depose./.

Richard [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three Judges.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.59v Annotate
The 30th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Manuel Gomez Arosta merchant)
of Sevile Assentista of his Majestye of Spayne)
and of Anthony Chavez of the same place for)
their respective goods in the shipp the Salvador)
whereof Christian Cloppenbergh is Captaine)
taken by some of the Parliaments ffleet)
Smith Budd.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

1)

Antonio Estevan de Balderas of [?XXXX]
an Inhabitant of Limma in the West Indies
merchant aged 38 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that he hath knowne the arlate Manuel Gomez de Arosta and Antonio
Chavez .25 yeares respectivley and for all that tyme they have bene and
now are Inhabitants of Sevill and subiects of the King of Spaine and
so accounted, and the sayd Manuel Gomez was and now is an Assentista of his
Majestye of Spaine and so accounted. And further saith that the sayd Manuel
Gomez de Arosta in the monethes of September october and November
was and att present is the lawfull Owner of the arlate 49 sackes of

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

washed woolls of the first marke in the margent, and of 24 sackes of

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

like wooll of the second marke in the margent, and that about the [?latter]
end of September or beginning of October 1652 he did cause the [?same]
to be laden for his owne Accompt aboard the arlate shipp the Salvador
Christian Cloppenbergh Master rising then in the bay of Cadiz for his owne
Accompt to be transported to Ostend and there delivered for his use to his
factor there, the premisses he knoweth for that he saw the foresayd [?woolls]
in the possession of the sayd Manuel Gomez in Sevil who acquainted this
deponent that they were his woolls and that his designe as to lade
them att Cadiz upon his owne Accompt for fflanders, and saith he sawe
the sayd woolls embarked at Sevill, and afterwards saw the barkes [?whereinto]
they were putt arrive safely therewith att the sayd shipp in the bay of Cadiz
and hath since the lading thereof seene a bill of lading for the same
under the hand of the sayd Christian Cloppenbergh whose manner of
writing he well knoweth and saith he was told by the sayd [?Anthony]
de Chavez in the sayd moneth of September in Sevill that he the
sayd Anthony had laden aboard the sayd shipp for his owne Accompt
to be transported to Ostend three serons of fine graine or [?Cochineale]
and having since seene a bill of lading for the same doth verily
beleive that the sayd Anthony de Chavez in September 1652 was
and now is the rightfull owner of the arlate three serons of [?Cochineale]

[THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marked as in the margent, and that he did lade the same for his owne
Accompt aboard the sayd shipp in the moneth of September 1652 [?or]
about that tyme to be carryed to Ostend and there delivered for his [?use]
and Accompt. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that hee [?hath]
seene a bill of lading in the Registry of this Court of the same [?tenor]
with the bill of lading to the allegation annexed and now shewne him for the foregoeing
woolls, and likewise one other of the same tenor with the bill of lading
for the sayd Cochineale to the sayd allegation likewise annexed and  now [?shewne]
him, and knoweing well the Character of the sayd Christian Cloppenbergh [?his]
firme, and the manner and Custome of firming of bills of lading [?for]
theis reasons and the reasons predeposed he saith he doth verily [?beleive]
[?and]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.60r Annotate
and is well assured that about the tyme and tymes of lading the sayd
woolls and Cochineale respectively att Cadiz as aforesayd, the sayd Christian
Cloppenbergh did signe three bills of lading of one tenor for the sayd woolls
and three of one tenor for the sayd Cochineal, and that two of eyther tnor
came along with the sayd goods and were aboard att the tyme of seizure
and that the Contents of the bills of lading now shewne him were and are
true and reall and were att or neere Cadiz about the respective dayes of
the dates thereof really signed by the sayd Christian Cloppenbergh. And
further hee cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that he hath credibly heard and verily beleiveth that the sayd shipp was
in her Course betwixt Cadiz ad Ostend seized by some of the shipps
of this Commonwealth, and that the sayd woolls and Cochineale thereby
came into the possession of the Takers, and otherwise referring hiselfe
to his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose saving that he beleiveth
for the reasons aforesayd that the sayd producents did and doe runn the
sole hazard and adventure of their sayd goods respectively, and that they
should have bene converted to their benefitt and use respectively by their
Agents in Flanders.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. negatively.

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne the producents 25 yeares or
thereabouts. and saw them about September 1652 att Sevill but not att Cadiz and otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the .3.d he saith he saw the sayd woolls in their sayd owners possession as
aforesayd. but did not see the sayd Cochineale in the possession of Anthony de Chavez

To the .4. he saith the producents are both Spaniards by common repute. and
further cannot depose saving as aforesayd

To the .5. he sayeth he was not privy to or knowing of the buying of any
the goods in question nor can give any further Accompt of the right
of the Claymers to the same than as aforesayd

To the .6. and .7. he saith he was not present nor saw the firming of the bills of
lading interrate, but beleiveth them to be reall and true for the reasons
aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 8. 9. and 10th he saith he beleiveth for the reasons aforesayd that
that the producents did cause he sayd goods to be laden. and further
being not aboard att the lading thereof he cannot depose.

To the .11. negatively

To the 12. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .13. he saith he was borne att Madrid, and inhabited att Limma
aforesayd. and otherwise negatively.

To the .14. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than he hath predeposed

To the 15. 16. 17. and 18. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 19. negatively.

To the 20. 21. and 22th he saith that he was not present att the
signing or delivery of the sayd bills of lading and therefore cannot
depose to theis Interrogatoryes any otherise than as aforesayd.

Anth[?XXX] [?XXX]
de [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Roger Kilvert [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated in Court
before the Judges

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.60v Annotate
The second day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of the King of Poland)
for goods and other necessaries lately)
seized in the Saint George John Peterson
George Master. Suckly. Smith)

Examined upon an allegation given and [?XXX]
in the Acts of Court on behalfe of the
sayd seizers.

1

Christopher Drake of the parish of Saint Mary [?Street]
Refiner aged 86 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

That the stuffes commonly called or knowne by the name or names of
Tabie or Tabies Sattens and all other like fine and Rich stuffes [?tabies]
and sattens made att Nantes in ffrance or any other place in ffrance
or elswhere are goods and commodities commonly vendible in Poland
and are usually sold there to the good proffit and advantage of the
merchant using that trade, the premisses he knoweth to be true
having himselfe some tymes traded in Poland and there seene and
observed such Tabies and rich stuffes commonly sold, videlicet att [?Tow?erin]
Kneeson, and Powsen three principall Cittyes or places of trade
in the sayd kingdome of Poland where this deponent hath bene
and resided, And otherwise cannot depose, saving that hee
beleiveth that the like part of Rich Tabies and stuffes are commonly
made in ffrance and bought at Nantes.

Christopher [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

William Neave of Dukes Place London merchant
aged forty three yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

That the Stuffes commonly called Tabies Sattens and the like rich
stuffes and sattens, and all other Rich sorts of stuffes tabies silkes
and sateens were and are Commodityes usually sold in Poland
and commonly worne by the Gentry and Nobility of that Country
and yeild good advantage to the merchant which he knoweth
for that he hath for diverse yeares lived and resided in [?the]
quality of a merchant in Dantzyck and Tourne two cities
in Poland and there and elsewhere in the sayd Country hath
seene and observed the sayd commodityes commonly sold and [?worne]
and otherwise cannot depose saving that having seene severall
quantityes of like stuffes arrive in those parts in ffrench [?bottoms]
he beleiveth such like tabies sattens and other rich stuffes are
made in ffrance and bought att Nantes and other rich stuffes are
made in ffrance and bought att Nantes and other ports cittyes
and places in ffrance

William Neave [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest
before Doctor Clarke and Mr Cock.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.61r Annotate
The fourth day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Manuel Gomez)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Antonio da Ponte of Teneriffa in the Canary Islands
merchant aged twenty eight yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
Manuel Gomez da Arosta and Anthony da Chavez whom he hath knowne
respectively for about 7 yeares are Spaniards merchants and Inhabitants
of Sevill and subiects of the King of Spaine and so accounted And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the monethes of
September October and November 1652. the arlate Manuel Gomez da
Arosta was and att present is the true and lawfull Owner of .73.sackes
of washed wooll arlate videlicet of 49 sackes of washed woolls of the first

[FIRST MERCHANTS MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marke in the margent. and of 29 sackes of washed wooll of the second

[SECOND MERCHANTS MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marke in the margent. And that att the tyme aforesayd the sayd Anthony
Chavez was Owner and Proprietor of the arlate three [?Sevons] of fine
Graine or Cutchineale marked with the third marke in the margent

[THIRD MERCHANTS MARKE, LH MARGIN]

which he knoweth for that he sawe the sayd woolls in the
possession of the sayd Arosta att Sevill, and the sayd Cutchineale in the sayd Chavez possession in Cadiz and heard them say they were their owne goods
and that they intended to send the same to fflanders from Cadiz, and this
deponent afterwards saw the sayd woolls laden for the Accompt of the
sayd Arosta, and heard that the sayd Cochineale was laden for the Accompt
of the sayd Anthony da Chaves. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith and deposeth that
in or about the moneth of October 1652. the sayd Manuel Gomez
da Arosta did for his owne Accompt att Cadiz lade aboard the sayd
shipp the Salvador Christian Cloppenbergh Master by his factor the aforesayd
73 sackes of wooll to be transported to Ostend and there delivered to
his Agents for his use, which he knoweth for that he saw the sayd
woolls embarked and passe off towards the sayd shipp, and hath
since seene bills of lading for the same in the Registry of this
Court. And heard the sayd Anthony Chavez say that he had laden
aboard the sayd shipp the foresayd se[?rons] of fine grayne for his
owne Accompt to be transported for his use to Ostend, and beleiveth
that the same were really so laden for that he hath seene bills of
lading for the same in the Registry of this Court. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith that having well veiwed
the two bills of lading to the allegation annexed which are as he saith
firmed with the handwriting of the sayd Christian Cloppenbergh
with whose hand and manner of writing he is well acquainted,
and having likewise seene two other bills of the same tenor respectively
abiding in the Registry of this Court he is well assured that the sayd
Christian Cloppenbergh after the lading of the sayd goods did signe
three bills of lading of one tenor for the sayd woolls, and three bills
of lading of one tenor for the sayd fine graine, and that they were
firmed att or neere [?Cadiz], and that .2. of the sayd bills of each tenor
[?XXX] came along with the sayd goods, and that the contents of the sayd
bills were and are true and not colourable. And otherwise referring
himselfe to the Acts of this Court he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.61v Annotate
To the 5. 6. and seventh articles of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd shipp the
Salvador after the lading of the sayd goods sett sayle therewith from
Cadiz and in her Course to Ostend was seized by some of the shipps of
this Commonwealth and that the sayd goods were then aboard and came
into the possession of them that made the seizure, and that the foresayd
Owners doe alone runn the hazard and Adventure thereof, and that
they were to be converted to the producents benefitt in fflanders
which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd, and for that he came
from Cadiz aboard the shipp Sampson Otto George Master in Companye
of the Salvador aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. negatively

To the .2. he saith he saw the sayd Anthony da Chavez att Cadiz
in Company of this deponent and Christian Cloppenburgh att the tyme
the Salvador lay there this last voyage, but saw not the sayd Manuel
Gomez da Arosta there. and otherwise referring himselfe to the
forefoeing depositions cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .4. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than he hath deposed

To the .5. he saith he saw not the sayd goods bought. nor can give
any other reason for or touching the propriety of the sayd goods other than
he hath allready declared.

To the 6. and 7. he saith he was not present nor saw the bills of lading[?sayeth]so [?much]
he beleiveth the sayd bills of lading to the allegation annexed were
and are true for the reasons afopresayd and otherwise cannot depose

To the 8. 9 and tenth he saith that being not aboard when the
sayd goods were laden nor present when the bills of lading were
signed he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .11th. negatively.

To the 12th he saith the producents did acquaint this Rendent that
they would lade the foresayd goods for flanders as he hath above
declared and otherwise he cannot depose

To the .13. he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Teneriffa and
otherwise negatively.

To the 14. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd

To the 15. 16. 17. and 18. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

To the .19. negatively.

To the 20. 21. and 22. he saith that being not present att the signing
and delivering of the sayd bills of lading he cannot depose
otherwise or further than he hath above deposed.

Don Antonio [?XXX]
Cahillay [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Roger Kilvert [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges)
----
The fourth day of November 1653.

The Clayme of don Sebastian Cortizes)
for 120 sackes of wooll et cetera in the Saint Augustine)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Egidio Mottet Secretary to his Excellency the Lord Ambassador
of his Catholique Majesty the King of Spayne aged 30 yeares
or there abouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.62r Annotate
To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
don Sebastian da Cortizes is one of the Asssentistaes of the King of Spaine
and an Inhabitant of Madrid and a subiect of the sayd King and
so accounted, which he knoweth being secretary to the Lord Ambassafor
of the King of Spaine Resident here in England. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the second third fourth fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation
This deponent saith that he hath seene and perused a letter from his
Catholique Majesty the King of Spaine date the 24th day of Aprill
last past signed by his sayd Majesties owne hand and directed to his Ambassador
here Resident in England, wherein, after Recitall made that the sayd
Sebastian Cortizes had laden aboard the sayd shipp Saint Augustin att Alicant
to be transported to Venice and there delivered to Augustin ffonseca arlate
111 sackes of woolls of Segovia and 9 sacks of woolls of [?Quenta] and that the
same were the woolls of the sayd Cortizes, and were for supply of his
sayd Majesties owne affaires and Armye in fflanders according to Contract
made by the sayd Cortizes in that behalfe; His Majesty did require
the sayd Lord Ambassafor to seeke for restitution of the sayd woolls in the behalfe
of his sayd Assentista, of and from this Commonwealth and Parliament
and Courts of Justice thereof, into whose hands the sayd woolls were come
by vertue of a seizure made of the sayd shipp Augustin by some of the
shipps of this Commonwealth; And this deponent hath likewise seene
another letter dated 9. April 1653. from Madrid from his Excellency Don
Lewis da Hara duke da Olivares his sayd Majesties first and cheife Minister
of State directed to the sayd Lord Ambassador of Spaine here Resident to the same
effect and purpose with the Kings aforesayd lLetter. for which reasons
this deponent beleiving that the sayd Sebastian da Cortizos is lawfull
Owner of the woolls arlate, and that he did lade them by his factors att
Alicant for his owne Accompt to be transported to Venice, and that the
sayd woolls were and are for supply of his sayd Catholique Majesties
Occasions. And otherwise cannot depose. [#]

[# LH MARGIN, AT 90 DEGREES]
saving he saith he hath likewise seene and perused a letter sent to the sayd Lord Ambassador from Don Diago Henricques de Castro Paymaster Generall
of his sayd Majesties Army in fflanders to whom the proceed of the sayd woolls was to be remitted from Venice for the uses aforesayd bearing date .10. August .1653. to the effect predeposed. together with a Procuracon
made by the sayd Paymaster Generall to him this deponent and bearing date .5. August .1653. which Procuracon now
is in this deponents possession in order to seeke and expedit the Restitution of the sayd wolls for the use and supply
of his Majestyes sayd affaires and Armies in fflanders.
Egidio Mottet [SIGNATURE, AT 90 DEGREEES]

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first. negatively.

To the 2. he saith he knoweth the sayd Sebastian Corteres onely by fame
and letters, and hath so known him [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] and by common fame he
hath inhabited in Madrid for many yeares past.

To the 3. he saith he knoweth nothing of the buying of the woolls on question
nor can depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .4. he saith he was not att Allicant when the goods in question
were laden, but saith his sayd Catholique Majestyes letter reciteth the
sayd woolls to be laden att Allicant by one ffrancisco Jaspar [?Muxisha]
and this Rendent never saw the sayd woolls in the producents possession
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 5. negatively.

To the 6. negatively.

To the 7. he saith he was borne att Leige in Germant and liveth in
London and otherwise negatviely.

To the 8. 9, 10. and 11. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

Egidio Mottet [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before dorctor Clarke and Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.62v Annotate
The 9th day of November 1653

On behalfe of Captaine ffawther deposeth et cetera.)
Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Adam Wolley of Ostend in fflanders [?merchant]
aged 21. yeares or thereabouts a wites sworne
and examined deposeth and sayeth as followeth.

To the first and the rest of the articles of the sayd allegation and to the [?papers]
thereunto annexed this deponent saith and deposeth that the arlate [?XXX]
fframncis ffawther in the monethes of June and July last past was [?the]
sole Owner of the sayd shipp the ffrancis her tackle and furniture and
so accounted, and that he by vertue of Letters of Reprizall under the
great seale of this Court was authorized to seize all shipps belonging
to the States of the united Provinces ffrench King and their subiects
and that by vertue of the sayd Commission or Letters of Reprizeall
he the sayd ffawther and Company did with the sayd shipp about the
latter end of June or beginning of July last past take and surprize
a certayne vessell belonging to fflushing whereof Cornelius [?BerghXX]
was master and that by stresse of weather the sayd shipp ffrancis and Berg[?hanaer]
vessell were forced into the Port of Ostend, and that soone after the
sayd shipp ffrancis was there arrested and stayd, and the sayd ffawther
imprisoned, and the sayd prize shipp delivered back againe to the
foresayd Cornelius Berghanaer all by vertue of warrants and
decrees from the Court of Admiralty of Bridges. And that the
sayd shipp of fflushing when she was taken and brought into Ostend
by stresse of weather as aforesayd was a new vessell of about 60 tonnes
and of the cleare value of 200 li sterling and upwards, and that there were
att the same tyme provisions and other things aboard the ffrancis the
value whereof he knoweth not. And moreover saith that albeit
it be notorious that there is firme league and amity betweene the
King of Spaine and this Commonwealth and their respective subiects
and that the sayd ffawther did by all legall and fair meanes [?desire ?the]
liberty to repair to England with his sayd prize vessell to cause the
same to have his owne shipp released as by the dutch papers to the sayd
allegation annexed this deponent beleiveth may appeare, which are [?the]
two Copies of the proceedings had and made att Bridges touching
his busines and receyved by this deponent from the Clarkes [?of]
the Admiralty Court there as and for true Copies, yet the sayd
shipp of fflushing is released and delivered back to the sayd Berg[?hanaer]
to the great dammage and preiudice of the sayd ffawther but to how
great a value he knoweth not The premisses he knoweth for hee
hath seene the foresayd Commission, and saw the sayd ffawther [?arrive] [?with]
his sayd shipps att Ostend being forced in by stresse of weather and
saw the sayd shipp ffrancis under arrest, and the sayd ffawther  [?XXX]
and heard the sayd Berghanaer confesse that his sayd vessell was
belonging to the port of fflushing and that the owners thereof [?there]
lived, saw the sayd vesssell restored to him the sayd [??Berghanaer]
and was ayding and assisting to the sayd Captaine ffawther att [?XXX]
and Bridges in the sollicitation of this busines there on his behalfe
And otherwise or fyrther referring himselfe to the Records of this Court hee
cannot depose.

Adam Woolley [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctors Clarke
and Godolphin
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.63r Annotate
The eleaventh day of November .1653.

The Keepers of the Liberty et cetera against)
the Golden Star Mich van Lubkin master)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

8

Captain Giles Shelly Commander of the Water hound
frigot in the immediat service of this Commonwealth aged
44 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second third fourth fifth sixth seventh eighth nynth and
tenth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith, that he this
deponent being Commander of the Waterhound frigot in the immediate
service of this Commonwealth did upon the 23th day of ffebruary
1652 last past heare and discerne att a good distance neere to the English
shoare towards Beachy two shipps in fight one against the other
and thereupon sayling towards the (sic) saw that one of them did weare the
Colours of this Commonwealth upon the poope and boltspritt end, and that
the other that fought against her was a tall large shipp wearing in
her main topmast head a Redd flagg with the picture of a hand and
sword therein, and an ancyent of like nature, which shipp had as
appeared to this deponent worsted the other shipp that wore this Commonwealths
Colours. And saith that he this deponent with the Waterhound frigott
wearing the Colours of this Commonwealth about noone of the same day
came upp with the sayd shipps and found that the sayd woorsted shipp that
wore the Colours of this Commonwealth was the arlate frogot the
Advantage commannded by Captaine Mill in the immediat service of
this Commonwealth and that the other shipp which most part of that forenoone
had fought against the Advantage and had still upp her flagg of
defiance and ancient aforementioned, was the arlate shipp the
Golden Starr or Morning Starr which he then did and still doth take to
be an enemy shipp. And saith that notwithstanding this deponents frigot
had and wore out the Parliament Colours and that there were two or
three other of this Commonwealths shipps in sight wearing likewise
the Parliaments Colours yet the sayd shipp the Golden Starr did upon the
English Coast and with in [?XXXXX] or thereabouts of the English shoare fire upon
the Waterhound and fought with her and wounded one of his quartermasters
in his head and neck so as he is still in great danger of life and not
like to recover of the sayd wounds, and likewise the Gunner of the sayd
shipp in his legg, and did not nor would submitt to the Water hound till
she was boarded and by force subdued by her, and saith that after boarding
and calling for quarter some of the sayd Golden Starrs men continued the
fight and shott the boatswayne of the Waterhound in his Arme with a
pistoll or small shott and saith the premisses notwithstanding and that the sayd
Golden starr waas att length subdued yet they continued upp their sayd
flagg and Ancyent of defiance and the same were not taken downe
till some of this deponents Company  Cutt the same downe. And this
deponent moreover saith that he verily beleiveth that the Master and Company of the sayd shipp
the Golden Starr did well know observe ad see that the sayd Advantage
frigot, and this deponents sayd frigot were shipps of warr of this
Commonwealth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.63v Annotate
Commonwealth, and that they did put and keepe their sayd Redd flagg [?and]
Ancyent in defiance of that authority under which the Advantage
and Waterhound fought, which he us the rather induced to beleeve
for that upon the approach of the Waterhound to them he this deponent
cyred out to them with his mayne strength to strike to the Parliament
of England in These words [?Amaine Amaine] to the Parliament of England and they the more plyed their shott, and did not nor
would not strike; and after they were subdued by force as aforesaid [?XX] the next [?XXX]
this deponent demannding of Michael Van Lubkin Master of the
Morning star or golden starr why he would fight with
the Parliament shipps upon the English Coast, he the sayd Lubkin
did not then pretend himselfe ignorant with whose shipps he fought but replyed
and sayd that in case this deponent had not come in he would never have
submitted to the Advantage, and moreover then sayd that if this
deponent had continued the fight broadside and boardside and had
not fallen upon him and boarded him by maine forece he would have
fought it out to the last and would have rather sunke by this deponents
side tthan have submitted to him or struck, and the sayd Lubkin did
about that tyme or not long after in this deponents presence and hearing
confesse and say, that he did not beleive his sayd shipp would be made
prize for his such fighting. And further saith, that he hath lately
heard William Bolter Clerke of the Checque of the Waterhound [?say]
and averr, that in discourse with some of the Golden starrs Company [?after]
the sayd fight, they told him the sayd Bolter that Michael van Lubkin
aforesayd upon the first discovery of this deponents frigot and
the shipps of this Commonwealth spake to this or the like effect. videlicet
Theis are but some of the English ffleet that Van Trump hath
scattered in the late fight, and I shall send one of them to the [?bottom]
or to the like effect. And saith likewise that after the seizure this
deponent sent his Master who understood the dutch tongue into [?the]
Roome where the Morning starrs Company being then prisoners [?XXX]
the Waterhound lay to examine and discover if it might be [?XXXX]
their sayd shipp was bound, and he brought this deponent word that
one of them did say and declare that they were bound directly for the
Port of Amsterdam; upon all which grounds and reasons this deponent
as he saith is fully convinced that the sayd Van Lubkin and shipps
Company did well know and take notice that the Advantage and Waterhound
and other shipps being as he now remembreth the May flower [?and]
[?tenth] whelpe wearing the Colours of this Commonwealth were shipps [?in]
the immediate service thereof. And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the 11th and 12. articles of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he was Captaine of the Waterhound at the tyme pf
seizure aforesayd.

To the 2. he saith he was present att the taking of the Golden starr

To the 3. he saith the Advantage frigot did first chase
the Golden starr before the Waterhound came [?up].

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.64r Annotate
To th e4.th he saith the sayd Advantage frigott did first fight with
the golden starr.

To the .5 he saith he knoweth the Advantage and Water hound
and saith they were both of them dutch built shipps att the sayd tyme
of fight.

To the .6. he saith he was present in the sayd fight, and saw most part of
it at distance as aforesayd but was not present with his shipp in actuall fight till about an howre before the seizure.

To the 7. negatively.

To the .8. negatively.

To the 9. negatively.

To the .10. he saith he is not bound to answer as he beleiveth
but referreth the case there putt to the Law.

To the .11. he saith that Many of this deponents Company and likewise
of the Advantage frigotts Company entred the Golden Starr upon
boarding, and were some of them likewise afterwards abord, And
this deponent and Captaine Mills were likewise aboard. And saith that
he this Rendent for his owne part had nnot nor tooke out of the sayd shipp
any plate or moneyes or any other goods whatsoever nor somuch as an
Orange or Lemmon, And saith he beleiveth some moneyes and other
goods were plundered by the Mariners of the sayd frigotts, but what
to what value or by whom in particular or buy name this Rendent
knoweth not. And further cannot depose.

To the 12.th he referreth himselfe to the Law in that behalfe and
otherwise is not bound to answer as he beleiveth.

To the 13. Interrogatory he saith that in case the Morning Starr shall be
adiudged prize he this Rendent expects such benefit thereby as
one serving in his quality may and ought to expect according to
the Acts of Parliament in such cases provided and not more. And
otherwise cannot depose.

Giles Shelley [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the)
Judges.)
----
The first day of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers et cetera against the ffortune)
of Stetin et cetera.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

10

Peter Caulier of Lothbury in the Citty of London merchant aged
27 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
ayeth as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation he saith he
knoweth nothing thereof.

To the fourth fifth sixth seventh eighth nynth and tenth Articles of the
sayd allegation, this deponent saith that about the month of July last past having
seene a publicke intimation affixed upon the Exchange London concerninge
the sale by the Candle of severall quantities of prize wheat, he went downe
unto Lymehouse aboard the arlate shipp the ffortune of Stetin upon which
some of the sayd wheat intimated to be sold by the Candle as aforesayd was
laden, with intent to veiw and search into the condition thereof in order
to bid moneyes for and buy the same upon the say of sale appoynted
in case he found it a penny worth and fitt for his turne. And saith that
being come aboard the sayd shipp he found the sayd wheat coursly sealed
and so hard clotted and baked together that he could not thrust his
hand into it, and in such a Condisiton that he did then conceive that it
would


HCA 13/68 f.64v Annotate
could not have bene receovered to be made fitt for this deponents use, and
there upon was resolved not to buy it. But saith he was present upon the day
of the sale thereof and of other parcells of Corne by the Candle by
the Commissioners for prize goods arlate, who then publiquely
according to the nature of that sale did putt off and sell the sayd
wheat to Mr Vincent his precontest but for howmuch in certayne he
att present remembreth not, but for about 19. or 20 shillings per [?quarter]
he taketh it, and saith the sayd Mr Vincent did bid and give more
for the sayd wheat than this deponent durst adventure to bid or
give for it, and beleiveth he gave the full and utmost worth
of it if not more. And saith moreover that of the observation of this
deponent the foresayd Commissioners for prize goods doe ordinarily
and usually sell their prize goods att a true balue and many
tymes at a higher value than the merchants can sell goods of
like kind and quality in their warehowses, and sometymes
to the losse and dammage of the Buyers to very considerable summes
of money, the experience whereof this deponent hath both himselfe
felt and seene in others. And saith that in or about July last
past  good sound English wheat might have bene
bought about London for .4. [?nubles] the quarter or thereabouts [?that]
reverted aby dammage, and for use neere halfe so [?XXX]
againe as the wheat in queation. and att present the like good sound
English wheat may be and is bought about London for about 20.
or 22 shillings the quarter. And further cannot depose saving
he beleiveth that the Corne in question if it had not bene removed
out of the sayd shipp as it was but had continued in the shipp 3 or 4
weekes longer would have bene in a farr worse condition than it
was either for sale or use, and would in probability have bene
much  more dammaged.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. 2 and 3. Interrogatories. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

To the .4. he saith the wheat aforesayd might as he beleiveth have
bene helped by turnig and airing and made merchantable
but not have bene recovered into a perfect good condition. And
otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Dorctor Godolphin.)

Peter [?Caulate] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.65r Annotate
Q.Q.

The 14th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of Pallache)
touching his jewells)
seized in the Elias)

Rp.

jius. 2.us

Samuel Pallache otherwise Jacob Carlos of Hamborough
Merchant, aged 36 yeares or thereabouts and 'John Hendrickson'
of Hasselm in Westfalia Shoomaker aged 17 yeares
or thereabouts, sworne in Court before the Judges of the
High Court of the Admiraltie say and depose by certue
of their oathes as followeth.

And first the said Samuel Pallache otherwise Jacob Carlos saith and
deposeth that hee came passinger from Hamborough in the shipp named
the Prophet Elias of that place (Simon Cornelis Prophet master)
bound for Rochell in ffrance, which said shipp comming in her course in the
Channell betwixt England and ffrance off Callice was met with and
seized by the Elizabeth frigat about a fortnight since and brought into
the River of Thames, And that hee this deponent brought along with
him from Hamborough in the said shipp Elias and had in his custodie aboard her
in his trunck at such time as the Elizabeth frigot came up with her
a wooden box gilded on the out side with gold of about halfe a foote longe
and about a quarter of a foote broade, and in the same box had another
of about a quarter of a foote longe alsoe gilded on the outside, and that
in the said boxes hee had severall Jewells
and precious stones of valew, namely in the said outer box three diamond
Rings, the diamond of one of which rings was of the weight
of eleaven graines and a halfe, the diamond of another of eight graines
and a halfe weight, and that of the third of the weight of six grains
and a quarterne, and a golden bodkin with a pearle in the [?greete] and thereof
two bracelets of pearle containing five hundred pearles, each pearle of a
graine and a halfe weight, two bracelets of gold the weight whereof
hee knoweth not, the figure of a parrot of gold set all over the bodie
with emeralds, and having a small chaine of gold fastned to the head
and taile, and a pearle in the middle of the said chaine. A figure
of a Camell of gold set alonge on the back with Mother of pearle
a hat band in gold in severall peeces, A little looking glasse having the
frame in fashion of a booke to shutt, in silver, and two redd stones
each of the bignesse of a small nutt peirced, and some other small things
of silver whereof hee remembreth not the particulars. And that in the said
inner box hee had five gold rings, each with a rubie therein, and a
sixth ringe of gold with the picture of Lewis the 13th late kinge of ffrance
therein appearing through a christall, and doth not remember the
other particulars, saving that in the said outer box there was the picture of
this deponents mother in a copper plate, and that on the said outer box
there was a key whereof hee hath the key in his custodie, and the inner
box had noe lock. And further deposeth that when the said shipp was
boarded and taken by the Captaine and companie of the Elizabeth frigot
namely two daies after the said seizure hee this deponent tooke the said
boxes with the said iewells and particulars therein and caused his contest and
servant John Hendrickson to sewe the same with some papers into
a peece of canvas and then delivered the same to the Gunner of the said
shipp the Elias to be by him laid up and [?preserved] for this deponent who
feared that the souldiers or mariners of the Elizabeth might breake up his
trunck and take the same away, and sawe the said Gunner hide the same in
the powder under the greate cabbin, and after that hee was sett
ashore in the Downes, leaving the said boxes and Jewells aboard i the
gunners custodie in the said powder. And the said John Hendrickson
deposeth hee tooke a box of about halfe a foote longe of his said
contest and master Samuel Pallache otherwise Jacob Carlos, and by his order
and in his presence sewed the same with some papers into a canvas case, and
sawe his said master deliver the same to the Gunner of the said shipp to [?XX]
said up for him and further sawe the said Gunner open the [?skull] of the greate
cabbin
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.65v Annotate
cabbin, and hide the said box and papers in the said [?XXXX] [?amongest] [?XXXX]
powder lying under the said cabbin, the said cabbin being the masters cabbin
and the place where this deponents master and hee kept and lodged before
and at the time of the said seizure. And saith that after his said master
was carried ashore, hee this deponent continued still aboard and
lodged in the said cabbin, and continued in her to the time of her
bringing up and to an anchor at Limehouse, and that on Sunday [?in ?the]
night last one Thomas Alderman a sea man put aboard by the Captaine
of the said frigot as master to bring her up, comming into the said cabbin
called the Carpenter of the said shipp unto him thether, and after the
said Carpenters comming to him, hee the said Alderman put this deponent
out and shutt the dore, and after the Carpenter and hee had bin about
halfe an hower within, the Carpenter came out, and this deponent [?and]
John Henderockson asking him what Mr Alderman did within, the Carpenter
presently asked him what there was under the cabbin in the [?case]
of canvas, and this deponent telling him a box and some papers, the
Carpenter said that Mr Alderman had found it, and would have the box
opened; and this deponent offering to open it for him, the said Alderman
said noe I will not have it opened I will carrie it to the [?PXXXX]
and soe tooke and laid it in his bedd in the said cabbin, and
this was a sunday night last. And the next morning the said Alderman
[?XXXX] tooke the said box and papers wrapt up in the said canvas and
put them uner his coate to carry them as hee said to the [?Parliaments] [?XXX]
and this deponent who lay in the cabbin seeing that offered to open
the said box for him againe, which the said Alderman refusing, [?XX]
deponent tooke hold of it and desired to have the papers that were
with it which being denied, hee said hee would goe alonge therewith
and soe got into the boate with the said Alderman, but this deponent
was by the souldiers forced out of the boate into the shippe, and [?soe]
the said Alderman carried the said box and papers away.

Jacob P[?XXrtof] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Joson [?hXXXs] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 17th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The claime of [?Nissin] Giovelli)
Abraham Gregia, Mosses Lacluke and)
Mayluff Palach merchants of Alexandria)
for their goods in the Saint ffrancis, John Arnoud master.)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the said claimers.

Smith dt.

1.

Alexander Gallico of Ligorne Marchant
aged 45 yeares or thereabouts, sworne and
examined.

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
in or about the moneth of July in the yeare of our Lord 1651. the said
Beneditto Teresa, did att Leghorne lade and puttt on board the arlate shipp
the Saint ffrancis whereof John Arnao was Captaine or Master one bagg
of moneyes conteyning nynety and nine peices of eight coyne of peru
marked with the first marke in the margent, for the use and Accompt
of the arlate [?Nisson] Giovalli, which sayd Nissen Giovalli then was and [?still]
is the true and lawfull Owner of the sayd nynety and nyne peices of eight
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.66r Annotate
And the sayd Benditto Teresi aboard the saud shipp the tyme and place aforesayd

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

did lade one other bagg of moneyes of the second marke in the margent
conteyning two hundred forty eight peices of eight Coyne of Peru and
an halfe for the use and Accompt of the arlate Abraham Oregia which
sayd Abraham Oregia  then well and att present is the true and lawfull owner
of the sayd 248 1/2 peices of 8/8, And the saud Beneditto Teresi did the
tyme and place aforesayd lade aboard the sayd shipp one bagg more of

[THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

moneyes coyne of Peru of the third marke in the margent conteyning
one hundred forty eight and halfe peices of eight for the Accompt of
the arlate Moses Laluck, of whhich sayd 148 1/2 peices of 8/8 the sayd
Moses Laluck then was and at present is the lawfull Owner and Proprietor
And the sayd Beneditto Teresi did lade aboard the sayd shipp the tyme
and place aforesayd for the use and Accompt of the arlate Malasse

[FOURTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

Sallach one bagg more of Peru moneyes of the fourth marke in the
margent conteyning ninety  nine peices of eight, of which 99 peices of
8/8 of the sayd 4th marke the arlate Malasse Sallach aforesayd ten was
and att present is the true and lawfull Owner, All which sayd moneyes
were so laden to be carryed and transported in the sayd shipp from Leghorne
to Alexandria in Egypt, and there to be delivered unto the aforesayd
respective Owners thereof according to their severall and respective
proportions before expressed, The premisses this deponent knoweth to be true
for that he saw all the sayd moneyes in the quiet possession of the sayd Beneditto
Toresi att his howse in Leghorne, where this deponent likewise saw the same
counted and bagged upp and marked and was by him the sayd Toresi
then told that they did belong to and were the moneyes of the Producents
according to the respective proportions aforesayd, and afterwards saw them
laden for the respective Accompts aforesayd by him the sayd Beneditto
Teresi who then was of this deponents knowledge the ffactor of the
Producents, and did their merchandizing busines att Leghorne. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the lading
of the sayd respective parvells of moneyes on board the sayd shipp the Saint
ffrancis att Leghorne as aforesayd the sayd shipp did sett sayle therewith toward
Alexandria and in her Course thither was with her ladeing taken and seized
by some shipps in the immediat service of this Commonwealth, and brought to
this Port of London, And saith that att the tyme of the sayd seizure, all and
singular the aforesayd parcells of moneyes were and remained on board the
sayd shipp the Saint ffrancis and came to the hands and possession of the Takers
thereof. which he this deponent knoweth being a Passenger aboard the sayd
shipp and in her att the sayd tyme of seizure. And otherwise cannot depose

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate Nisson
Giovalli, Abraham Oregea, Moses Laluk, and Malasse Sallach were and are
merchants and Inhabitants of Alexandria and there have lived for theis twenty
yeares last past, and were and are subiects of the Grand Seignor the Turkish Emperor
and so accounted. And further saith that the sayd Beneditto Teresi was and
is the ffactor or Agent of the sayd parties att Legorne, and there lives and does
their
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.66v Annotate
their busines, and was and is a native of fflorence in Italy and a [subkect]
of the Great Duke of Tuscany and so accounted. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he knoweth that the Producents were and are Owners of the
monyes now Claymed for that they were and are the proceed of the producents
goods sent by them from Alexandria to Leghorne and otherwise referreth
himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose saving that he
saw the bills of lading hereafter menconed firmed att Leghorne for the moneyes aforesaid.

To the .2. he saith he is by birth and nation of Leghorne in Tuscany, and by
Religion a Jew. and otherwise negatively.

To the third he saith he knoweth well the partyes interrate videlicet Missin [?GXXXXXX
Abraham Oregia Moses Laluck, Mainluffe Salach and Benedito [?ForesXXX] And
saith that the said Beneddito Teresi did by letter give order to this Rendent
to Clayme the sayd moneyes which letter is now in the hands of Mr George
Smith one of the Proctors of this Court, In which letter were likewise [?sent]
this Rendent four bills of ladeing for the respective parcells of moneyes
aforesayd which bills of ladeing this Rendent saw firmed att Leghorne
the first day of July 1651. new stile, by Andrea [?Hulibert] Servian the
Purser of the sayd shipp the Saint ffrancis which sayd Bills of ladeing being
part of his Instructions for makeing the sayd Clayme in this cause he now
leaves in the Registry of this Court for the further and better satisfaction
of the sayd Courte. And otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he
cannot depose:

To the .4. Interrogatorie he saith that having receaved from the sayd Benedito
Terazi the aforesayd letter and bills of lading for the Clayming of the
moneyes now in question, he this Rendent did deliver the same to Mr Smith
aforesayd, to whom this Rendent by like order of Teresi is to pay such
ffees as shall be due for the carrying on of this cause according to law
and is to receyve the same agayne of and from the sayd Teresi. and otherwise
negatively.

To the fifth he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

Alettaro: galica [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and Mr Cock.
----
The 18th day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of John Hendrickson Beerenpoot for)
the shipp Beerenpoot and the freight, and for)
his goods in the said shipp Budd ffrancklyn.)

Examined upon an Allegation given on the
behalf of the said Claymers.

jus.

Hendrick Jansen Beerenpoot of
Hooghe Carspet in Holland Mariner aged 21
yeares or thereabouts a Witttnesse sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as followeth vdelicet.

To the first and second articles of the said Allegation and to the schedule thereto
annexed, and now reade unto seene and perused by this examinate at the
time of his examination, hee saith and deposeth That all and singular the
(goods
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.66r Annotate
[THIS PAGE IS MISSING]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.67v Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories:0-/

To the first hee saith, hee was in the said shipp the Beerenpoot at the
time of her surrender to Captaine Trenchfield and the other English
Coammannders and saith hee expecteth the hire due unto him in Case the
fraight interrate be paid to the producent, which is all the benefitt hee expecteth
by the same, And otherwise negatively, and further cannot depose.

To the second hee saith hee was present at and assisting in the lading of the
goods in question, and tooke otice of the same, and of the markes thereof, an
was aboard when Captaine Trenchfield tooke possession thereof, but saw not
the unlading of the same. And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the third hee saith by Vertue of his Oath, That the said shipp the
Beerenpoet made no Port nor delivered out any goods after her comeing from
Marseilles till the said Captaine Trenchfield tooke possession of her and her
lading. And further saving his foregoeing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose/

To the 4:th hee saith, That ll the goods schedulate were in the hold of the said
shipp, and none of them between decks, and saith there were no other goods
aboard the said shipp at the time of her said surrender save onely the goods
belonging to the said producent, which by agreement between him and the English
Captaines hee was to have and enjoy:-

To the 5:th hee saith, the said shipp Berrepoot and her lading were delivered to
Captaine Trenchfield at Sale[?brne] in Spaine, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 6:th hee saith each Hollands Liver or gilder is commonly accompted to be
the valew of two shillings English, And saith the bills of lading for the goods
schedulate were all left at Marseilles. And further cannot depose:-/

Repeatted before doctor Clarke and
the other Judges:-/

heindrick Jans [?XXXX ?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation.

2us./

John Cornelisen of Hoogh Carspel in Holland
Mariner aged 18. yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined/:-

To the first and 2d. articles of the said Allegation and schedule thereunto
annexed hee saith and deposeth, That after the shipp the Berenpoet arlate
had received her full lading at Marseilles in ffrance, of oyle, soape, Almonds
Aniseeds, Cominseeds, honey, Spanish greene and severall other Vomodities
this deponent then beingCabbin keeper aboard the said shipp did severall times
heare, and well remembreth, that the producent the Master of the saud shipp
and Jacob Isbrantson his then Stiersman, this deponents precontest, and the
Barber Chirurgion of the said shipp, did [?XXX] discoursing together comeing in
theri intended voyage with the said shipp and lading thence to Amsterdam, and
concening the fraight due for the Cargo of the said shipp in Vase the said
shipp and her ladeing arrived in safety at their desired port, that the said
fraight would amount unto 12155 gilders hollands money, And saith that
(the said [CHECK THE FLOW]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.68r Annotate
The 25th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The claime of Peter and Paul Talemont and)
others of the Greenland company in ffrance)
[?in] the [?Lewise] and the hunter. Suckley. Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the
said claimers, made in the acts of Court.

1

John Rousseau of Rochelle in ffrance Merchant aged
30 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee well knoweth the shipps
Lewise and the hunter and that at the time of their seizure by the shipp or shipps
of this Commonwealth the said shipps the Lewise and the hunter and lading aboard them were in proprietie
belonging to Peter and Paul Talemont allegate and others being the Greeneland
company of ffrance, which others were and are by name Haques Bilbant, Anna Gasson
widowe of late Mr Bardet and Madame de Louvigne widowe, and to them they
are at present belonging together with their said ladinghe, which hee knoweth because
hee this deponent living with the said Jaques Bilbant and Mrs Gossen
(who dwell together at Rochelle) hath for severall yeares last past on the behalfe
and at the costs and chardges of the said owners set out and fitted the said shipps
from Rochell to sea for the said Greenland voyage, hee being therein and
thereto imployed by the said owners, who for several yeares last past have used
the said trade of sending shipps from ffrance to Greenland, which hee knoweth
having for tenn yeares last bin imployed by them in fitting and setting out their
said shipps, which from time to time accumstomed to retourne with their oile and
whale finnes from Greenland to haver de Grace for the accompt of the said owners and
claimers in this cause, and the said vessells have in their returne from Greenland
(as hee hath bin certainly informed) accustomed to come 1/2 the way of the Texel
on the coast of Holland to take in pilots to pilot and conduct them to
Haver de Grace, and this voyage they were to doe the [?lok] namely to take
pilots aboard at the Texel in their returne from Greenland to pilot them
to Haver de Grace, this deponent by direction of the said owners giving the
masters of the said vessells order soe to doe when they proceeded from Rochell
on the said voyage as he had formally oftentimes donne, and that the said
shipps were this voyage to retourne and come directly for haver de grace according
to the order given from the said producents to the masters and company of the
said shipps at the time of their proceeding from Rochall, and were not to
goe for Amsterdam or other place of holland or Zealand, but meerly as
aforesaid to take in a pilot at the Texel to bringe them for ffrance as
formerly they had severall times donne, and never before either went or
were ordered to goe for holland or Zealand but to retourne directly for ffrance
[?And] [?for] the reasons aforesaid hee saith hee well knoweth that noe other person
or persons saving the soid Greenland company of ffrance before named had
or hath any interest or share whatsoever in the said shipps and lading or
any part thereof. And lastly saith that there was an order or passe
grannted by the right honorable the Counsell of State of England for each
of the said shipps for the said voyage, which orders or passes, namely one
for each of the said shipps, and two for two other shipps set out by the
said company, this deponent hath seene under the seale of the said Counsell
being for the safe going and trading and retourning of the said shipps in the said voyage
and imployment to Greenland and back againe for haver de Grace. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the Interrogatories

To the first hee saith that the said shipp the Louisa was built in the River of
Charanton neare Rochell about eight yeares since by the same owners, and the
Hunter was bought by them in Holland about nine yeares since, and ever
since that time the said respective shipps have bin in the said Greenland Imployment
of the said owners of this deponents knowledge. and otherwise negatively saying
hee never went the said voyage to Greenland and saving as aforesaid

To the second and third hee cannot depose.

To the fourth hee saith the said shipps went out and began the said voyage from
Rochell.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.68v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 26th of October 1653.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

John de la Ralde of Saint John de Luce in Biscay Mariner
masters mate of the shipp the hunter aged 22 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.69r Annotate
whales finnes upon and for the proper accompt and adventure of the said producents
the Greenland company of ffrance, who have for all the time aforesaid used the
said trade and imployment betwixt Greenland and ffrance, and this deponent and
severall others of the company of the said two shipps the Louise and hunter have
longe served the said company in the said imployment wherein this deponent hath bin
tenn yeares as aforesaid, and constantly [?XXXXX twice  from ?XXXXXXX] to deepe hath retourned to haver de Grace with
oile and whalle finns taken for the said company, and still from time to time
when the weather hath in fowle or the winde contrary they have gonne and
touched at the Texell to take in pilots for deepe or haver de Grace,
but when the weather hath bin faire and good they have gonne home without
staying or going thither for a pilot, and saith that the Texel is right in or but
little out of their course from Greenland to haver de Grace and that the
said shipp the hunter was intended in case the winde was ot good to
take a pilot at the Texel
for haver de Grace, and was intended to
dispchardge her lading at haver de Grace to and for the use and accompt of the
said producents the said Peter and Paul Talemont and company aforesaid
to whom the same lading was and is in propertie belonging and was and is for
their advanture, without any other person having any interest or share therein
And further that the said shipp was not intended to goe with the
said lading or otherwise for holland or into any part thereof, but mearly to take
in a pilot as aforesaid at the Texel for haver de grace. And otherwise hee
cannot depose, saving hee knoweth the premisses being masters mate of the
said shipp the hunter when shee was seized, and saving hee hath seene a
passe from the right honourable the Counsell of State if this Commonwealth
for the said shipps free passage [?for] haver de grace

To the crosse Interrogatories

To the first

To the second and 3

To the fourth

To the 5th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.69v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
the same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said allegation.

3.

John Harizmende of Sibour neere Saint John de Luca in Biscay
mariner, pilot of the said shipp the hunter aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]

used the said trade of [?sending]
shipps to Greenland to take whales to make oile and to have the [?same]
[?sent] back to Haver de grace or other part thereabouts of ffrance

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.70v Annotate
The 27th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Libertie of England by)
authoritie of Parliament against the golden)
hawne alias the Golden Cock, Barent)
[?Tonison] master.)

Rowe dt.

ffrancis Hubert of Ipers in fflanders
souldier, aged 25 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee came passenger
in the said shipp the Golden hawne alias the Golden Cock from Nantes
bound for Rotterdam and was aboard her when shee was seized, and that
hee soe came aboard her at Nantes about six weekes since.

To the second hee saith that as hee was informed by the stiersman and
some of the company of the said shipp the Golden hawne, shee was
and is belonging to Rotterdam, and that one [?Paul] a merchant there
dwelling was and is the sole owner thereof, and that the said [?Paul] is a
dutchman and a subiect of the States of the United Netherlands, and alsoe
that the said shipp came from Rotterdam to Nantes.

To the third hee saith that the said shipp the Golden hawne or Cock
was taken on on about sunday last was a fortnight neere heyssant on the
coast of ffrance by the Ginney frigot, and that the said shipps lading
is ffrench wines and brandewine, laden at Nantes aforesaid.

To the fourth hee saith that the said shipp at the time of the said seizure
was bound for Rotterdam there to dichardge, and intended thither to [?saile]
and would have gonne thither in case shee had not bin intercepted./

To the fifth hee saith that the masters name of the said shipp the Golden
hawne was Barent Tunison, and that hee undertooke to bringe this
deponent to Rotterdam in the said shipp

And for the further confirmation of the premisses hee produceth and showeth
a note in dutch, which hee saith was written by Joachim Jacobson
the Stiersman of the said shipp at Portsmouth, and sent by this deponent
thence to be delivered to one mr [?Almondo] a merchant of this citie
from whom the said stiersman desired to knowe whether hee could gett
better passage hence for Rotterdam (where the said stiersman said hee
dwelt) than from Portsmouth, and leaveth the said note for the
further information of this Court.

francois aubert [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three Judges.
----
The 27th of October 1653. [CENTR EHEADING]

Chilson and company against the greate)
Christofer aforesaid, in the preparatorie.)

dt.

3

Michael Cruyer of Stetin Mariner
master of the said shipp the greate Christofer
aged 40 yeares or thereabouts sworne in
Court and examined upon the foresaid
Interrogatories saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet.

To the first and second hee saith that the said shipp the greate Christopher
was built at Stettin aforesaid in the dominion of the Queene of
Sweden, and was launched about whitsuntide last and that this [?was]
her first voyage and that this deponent hath bin master of her ever since
her said first building, and was constituted master by her owners
John ffeltzburg, Phillip Roadlife, Anthonie hanton, Martin Nokes,
derrick Masse and hee this deponent, all Inhabitants of Stettin, and
subiects of the Queene of Sweden and that the said Roadlife, hanton, [?and]
Martin [?Nekel] have each an eighth part, the said ffaltzburg a [?sixteenth]
part, derrick Masse a 32th part and the rest was and is belonging to
him this deponent saving that when hee was this voyage at Riga hee this
deponent sold a sixteenth part of his said shipp belonging to [?XXX]
[?XX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.71r Annotate
harman Becker his freighter dwelling there, to be paid [?here] upon the deliverance
of his lading [?XXXX] 92 dollers which hee received in hand; And saith that this deponent and the said Martin [?Mekel] caused
the said shipp to be built and then sold out the other parts to their said nowe
fellowe owners, of whom this deponent received and caused the money payable
for the same to be received for the said parts.

To the third hee saith hee this deponent was borne and hathlived all his time
in Stettin and was and is a subiect of the Queene of Sweden
and that his company are some of them Stetiners, others of dantzike, one
of denmarke, and all Easterlings.

To the fourth hee saith the said owners have dwelt all their times at Stettin
saving the said Becker, whom this deponent hath not knowne otherwise then
this voyage, and otherwise negatively.

To the 5th hee saith his lading consistteth of 147 bundles of hemp
16 fatts of pot ashes, two hundred barrells of linsead, 18 stocks of clapboard,
12 peees of planck, halfe a last of tarr, halfe a last of gritts, and
some firewood and wooden pinns, all laden at Riga saving the said plancks
and pinns, which this deponent brought in the said shipp from Stetin and
that the said plancks and pinns belonge to this deponent and the said owners of Stettin, and the said clap board
to him and the said Becker and that the rest of the said lading
was laden by the said Becker who freighted him together
with one Tilman [?Bramer] of Roga, and Bartholomew harne of the same
which Becker, Bramer and harne laded the rest of the said goods and told
this deponent that it was all free goods, but who the said foods belonge
unto whether to them the said freighters or not hee saith hee knoweth
not, and saith hee was freighted for dunquirke there to dischardge
unlesse at dunquirke their correspondents should agree with this deponent
there and [?get] him to goe to London with the said goods, and that the persons
at dunquirke to whom hee was consigned were Abraham van hoaghgarde
and Phillip de Pape.

To the 6th hee saith that hee signed three bills of lading for the said goods
which hee had in the said shipp and which with his other papers were seized
by Captaine Swaine and company, and that hee signed them at Riga
and hee referreth himselfe to the said bills which hee supposeth to be brought
into this Court, and otherwise hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 7th hee saith hee was never in ffrance bot hath bin in holland
in theise last 8 yeares, and that hee knoweth not the said de Pape and
hogarden.

To the 8 hee saith hee was to finish his voyage and receive his freight at
dunquirke, unlesse hee was there agreed with anew for London.

To the 9th hee saith hee had nowe but a Stetin flagge aboard, and was
seized at sea by Captaine Swaine neere the [?Jutza] Riff, And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the 10th hee saith hee was freighted by Charterpartie, which was alsoe
seized by the said Swaine, and that the said Charter partie was made at Riga.

To the 11th hee saith the said harman Becker is a native of Riga and
there dwelling, and otherwise negatively.

To the 12th hee saith the said Becker and the said [&gt;Breuner] and [?hance]
laded the said goods soe as aforesaid not belonging to this deponent and owners,
and that this deponent hath not yet received any part of his freight,
and otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the 13th negatively.

To the 14 negatively to every part thereof.

[&gt;Mis gall] [?XXXXgra] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke dorctor Godolphin
and Collonel Cock.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.71v Annotate
The 27th of October 1653

Captaine ffrancis ffawther Commander of the ffrancis)
the [?Love] of fflushing, whereof hubrecht)
Jansen is master.)

Rowe dt.

1

Jaques Pinabel of Sherbour in [?NaXXX]
sailer, aged 17 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee ws 
of the company of the said vessell whereof the said hubrecht or [?hXXXX] Johnson [?was]
master at the time of her seizure, namelyhee was Cooke and boy
aboard her, and that hee hath served about halfe a yeere in her and came
first aboard her in fflushing, to which port shee belongeth, and soe longe
hee hath knowne her said master, and saith shee tooke in her lading (which was
aboard at the time of her seizure) at fflushing, and departed thence [?XXX]
about six weekes since to goe for dunquirke; And saith hee heard it said
by severall at fflushing that the master aforesaid (who dwelleth and keepeth
his house and familie at fflushing) hath a quarter part in her, and that
one of the servants of Mr [?Love] a great merchant of fflushing hath a
part in the said shipp, and that the rest was and is belonging to Inhabitants
and Burghers of fflushing.

To the third and fourth hee saith that the said shipp was to goe and dischardge
at dunquirke and thence to retourne to fflushinge, and that this deponent
was hired at fflushing for that voyage namenly to goe to dunquirke and
retourne to fflushing with the said shipp, and that there were papers aboard
at the time of the said seizure, And otherwise hee cannot depose [?saying]
hee doth not knowe to whom the said lading belongeth, but saith it was [?XXX]
laden by dutch merchants of fflushing, whose names hee knoweth not
And othewise hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the fifth the said shipp had the fflushing flagge aboard at the
time of her said seizure, and that her company consisted of thesaid
master, three men besides and this deponent the boy, and that the
three men were alsoe fflushingers, and they and the said master
were and are by such their dwellings subiects of the states of the
United Netherlands, and this deponent a subiect of the kinge of [?XXXX]

Repeated before the three Judges.

Pinabel [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 28 of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Touchng the [?Acorne] of)
Amsterdam taken by the Peter)

Rowe dt.

John Sax of Greenwich Mariner, and Thomas Withers of
the parish of Catherin Creechurch London Baker, both
waiters for the prize office aboard the shipp the Acorne
sworne before the right worshipfull William
Clarke and John Godolphin doctors of lawe and
Charles George Cocke Esquire Judges of the high
Court of the Admiraltie say and depose as followeth.

That they theise deponents about six weekes since were sent as waiters abord
the said shipp lying then at Eyriff being a prize taken by the shipps of
this Commonwealth, and have ever since waited abord her, and when they
came abord her there were noe dutch men in her, but only such [?XXXX]
as were sent to bring her up from whom and others theise deponents have heard
that the said shipp was and is belonging to Amsterdam; And they affirme by [?XX]
of their oathes that shee is very deepe laden, and upon every flood [?bailes] [?XXX]
ladinge, and therefore it is very expedient and necessary for the preservation
of the said shipp and goods, to land her said goods. The [?XXXX]
[?XXXX] constant they aboard her at 2 s a day a man
which are to be paid by the prize officer besides the custome house [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.72r Annotate
The 28th of October 1653.

The Black Cock)

Row dt

John Axon of Debtford in the County of Kent Mariner, and Enoch Peate
of London sonne of George Peate, waiters for the prize office aboard
the shipp the Black Cock sworne in Court the day aforesaid say
and depose by vertue of their oathes

That thus deponent John Axon went aboard the said shipp as a waiter the tenth
of September last and the said George Peate in the fourteenth of the same moneth
and Found some dutch men in her, but whether they were of her company or not
they knowe not, and that they found not nor sawe any papers taken in her, and
that shee is lying in Greenwich hole and the winter weather comming ona nd shee
having but one cable and a peece of one, it will be necessarie to hale her
ashore to prevent dammadge to her selfe and alsoe to other shipps, besides
a greate chardge to the state in paying waiters, and sea men, of whom there are
eight aboard in constant pay from the prize office at 2 s a day, besides custome
house waiters./

John Axon [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Enoch Peate [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 28th of October 1653.

The Church of Edam./

Rowe dt.

John Holwell of Clements Lane without Temple Barr a waiter
aboard the Church of Edam a prize taken by the shipps of this
Commonwealth, sworne in Court saith and deposeth by vertue
of his oath.

That hee went aboard the said shipp the two and twentieth of September last as
a waiter for the prize office and hath ever since waited aboard her and saith
shee is nowe lying in Bugsbies hole and very heavie laden, and ground two
foote every tide, wherby both shipp and lading will be in greate danger
unlesse shee be delivered, which deliverie would prevent the said dammadge
and save the state the chardge of 6 waiters and seamen, who are in constant
pay of the prize office at 2 s a day, besides Custom house waiters
and saith there were none of her company brought up in her, they being
(as hee understood) turned ashore at Harwich, and that the said ship is comonly
accompted to be belonging to Edam in Holland and was taken by the
Middleborough in the service of this Commonwealth.

John Holwell [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 29th of October 1653.

The Galliot hoy, alias the Hope)

Rowe dt

Henry Hastings of the parish of Saint John Zachary London
Goldsmith aged 48 yeares or thereabouts a waiter for the prize office aboard
the said shipp lying at Ratcliffe, sworne before
the right worshipfull William Clarke and John Godolphin doctors
of lawes and Charles George Cock Esquire Judges of the
High Court of the Admiraltie, saith and deposeth
by vertue of his oath.

That hee went aboard the said shipp as a waiter from the said office the 15th of
September last past shee then lying and still continueing neere [?stone] staires at
Ratcliffe and hath ever since bin a waiter aboard her, and saith that the said
vessell is laden with whale blubber and salt water brought from Greenland and
severall emptie caskes, and that there were two dutchmen in her when heesoe came aboard
her who said they did not belonge to her, and that there were none of her company
brought up nor any papers that hee knoweth of, and further that there is this deponent
and a seaman at 2 s a day constant pay by the prize office and a custome house waiter
and that the landing of the said lading would save these chardges/

Henry Hastings: [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.72v Annotate
The Nine and twentieth of October 1653.

On the behalfe of the owners of the]
King David of Hambrough.]

Rp.

Gerrit [?XXXX]
of Hamborowe mariner, master of the shipp the King David
of Hamborough, aged fiftie yeares or thereabouts sworne in the
High Court of the Admiraltie of England before William
Clarke and John Godolphn doctors of the lawes and
Charles George Cock Esquire Judges of the said Court
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath.

That the said shipp the King David nowe rideing in the
Downes was and is belonging to the port of Hamborough, and that [?Hendrick]
Bekeman, John Verporten Adrianson and Martin Berenbergh all Merchants
and dwellers in Hamborough and subiects of that free State and
this deponent a burgher and subiect of the same citie were and are the true and
sole owners of her and of her tackle, apparell and furniture, which
shipp hee saith hee this deponent for and on the behalfe of himselfe and his
said owners bought at Hamborough about thirteene yeeres since and ever
since hath sailed her from and to Hamborough, betwixt which citie
and Newcastle in England and sometimes to London hee
saith hee hath cheifly gonne and traded with the said vessell. And
that nowe shee is laden with wooll and
some other goods for the accompt of Hamborough merchants living in
Hamborough, and with some sea coles for the accompt of himselfe
and of his said owners. And lastely that the seabrief and certificate under the seale of Hamborough
hereunto annexed were and are true and reall and that the contents thereof
as alsoe of the two light-briefs or passes dated the foure and
twentieth of this instant October and alsoe annexed were and are true.

garet [?XXXssun] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The second of November 1653.

On behalfe of the State.

John Bourne of Limehouse in the County of Middlesex Mariner
aged 21 yeares or thereabouts, sworne in Court before the three
Judges thereof the day aforesaid, saith and deposeth by order
of his oath.

That a certaine prize named the Globe (said to belong to Enchusen) was on
or about about the eighth of September last off the coast of Jutland met with and
taken by the fforesight frigot in the service of this Commonwealth [?XXX]
[?Stainer] commannder) with her lading of timber from the East country and
26 barrells of sope ashes, ad brought into harwich on the 25th of the
same moneth, and since shee is sent into the River of Thames. And saith that there [?were]
only eight barrells of the said ashes taken out of her before her before her delivery
over to the prize officers at harwich, to whome her whole cargo of [?XXXX]
and the remainder of the said barrells of ashes being 18 barrells (the
seamen of the said frigot having taken the other eight) were by this deponent
delivered with the said vessell, being a [?XXXX] wherepf hee was put master by the said [?XXXX]
Stainer to bringe her thither, and this deponent there upon [?XXXXX]
Inventory in writing of the sad cargo and 18 barrells of ashes, and of the vessell [?XXXX]
furniture of the said [?XXXXX]. which hee delivered to the said Captaine Stainer
And lastly that all the dutch company of the said prize were taken out of her [?And]
put into the said frigot by order of the said Captaine and none of them brought to harwich with [?XXX], and kept by [?XXX XXX]
and papers it appeared that shee was of Enchusen.

[?JXXXX ?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.73r Annotate
The second of November 1653.

The keepers of the libertie of England by authoritie)
of Parliament against the Mercury John detree master and)
other shipps. Suckley. Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation given
yesterday on the behalfe of the
claimers by the said Suckley.

.j.

Joachim Dowke of Lubeck Mariner, master of the
shipp the ffortune (sic) of Lubeck, aged 38 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee this deponent
with the shipp the ffortune of Lubeck arlate, whereof hee is master, Garrit ffolkes
in a shipp of Lubeck (named the Gideone) and hendrick Caven
in another shipp pf Lubeck (named the hope) together
with thirteene hamburger masters in their respective vessells (the names of which
vessells hee knoweth not but well knoweth tenn of the masters of them, namely
John detree, hendrick Martins, Barant Verdanck, Barent Jacobsen, Simon
Cornelison, Claus van Reten, Witte Wittenson, Zacharie Milde and [?Bay] Peters,
and hance Claeson) sett saile together in company from the River of Elve on the
seaven and twentieth of September last old stile without any Convoy or man
of warr with them, bound for Rochell, Nantes and other places in ffrance
and this deponent for Bourdeaux to fetch wines; and that on the satturday
next following such their departure from the Elve being in the North sea in
their course for ffrance they happened in company of Martin Minors a dantsicker
in his shipp hendrick [?dauner] of Lubeck in a shipp whereof hee was master,
and an Embdener in his vessell whereof hee knoweth not the name, and the said
three shipps soe by them met went alsoe alonge in their company bound as they
said for ffrance alsoe. And otherwise hee cannot depose,

To the second article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that on sunday
the second o October last past (old stile) as the said vessells were come
out from in their course as betweene Dover and Callice there appeares two vessells
[?XXXXX[ of them, with an English private man of warr who was aboard
a Galliott one of their company (which as this deponent after understood [?XXXX]
espying, hee the said private man of warr set saile and fledd, and the said
two shipps which appeared asterne sailed after and chaced him towards Dover,
And otherwise hee cannot depose, for that hee was farr to lee ward of the said
fleete.

To the third fourth fifth and sixth hee saith that the next morning namely on monday morning the third
of October last the said two vessells which soe stood after the said private man of
warr, (and whereof this deponent lost the sight all sunday night) appeared
againe, and were found to be men of warr of Zealand by their flaggs, and
sailed about a league distant from the said fleete, and held the same course 
with them and the same morning an English frigot comming with the winde
upon the said fleete the said two dutch men of warr stood towards the same
and anon another English shipp appearinge to leaward, the said two men
of warr stood towards her, leaving the chace of the first which fledd, and
comminge up
the said second shipp exchanged some shotts with her and
then went before the winde, and the said English shipp came up with the
said fleete, and staid there, And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving that
the said English shipp that soe came up with and staid them (as hee afterwards
understood) was called the Elizabeth commannded by Captaine Mings in thae
service of the Commonwealth of England./

Ro the seaventh hee saith that during the said exchange of shotts betwixt the
said shipps, the said hamburgers [?showed] the hamburger colours
and the Lubeckers the Lubeck colours, aswell as they could [?XXX XX XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.73v Annotate
was soe little that it did not spread their colours, but that they were
faine to stretch them with their hands and otherwise to the end to have th[?em]
discovered, and assoone as the Elizabeth came and shott towards them [?they]
presently struck their sailes, and hoisted out their boates to goe aboard her
and the masters went and showed their passes and docuements to the said
Captaine Mings, and giving him accompt of their voyages, desired
leave to prosecquute the same, but the said Captaine told them they
must goe for London, whereto they alsoe yeelded and came freely onto
the downes, not at any time endeavouring to escape or goe from [?the]
Elizabeth. And saith they had notthing to doe with the said two dutch
men of warr, nor they with them, nor were the said dutch
men of warr in ought assisted or [?abetted] by the said fleete or any of
the masters or shipps thereof. And albeit hee this deponent had two
peeces of artillery, yet had hee not any linstock lighted nor any
proportion towards offence or defence in regard of any of the said shipps
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 7. and 8th hee saith that the said thirteene hamburger shipps
were and are commonly accompted to belonge to that port, And otherwise
hee cannot depose, saving that this deponents said shipp belongeth to the
port of Lubeck where shee was built, and where her owners dwell

To the nineth hee cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith that hee hath bin master of the said shipp the ffortune
of Lubeck ever since shee was built, which her buildin was donne at
Lubeck about nine yeares since, where hee first came aboard her. And
otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the second hee saith that Antonio Wesel is owner of a wuarter part of
his said shipp. hendrick Mittendorp of a quarter part, John Wereater of
3 sixteenth parts, Gaspar Deacon of an eighth part, hendrick [?Scholt]
of a sixteenth part and hee this deponent of an eighth part of the said
shipp, tackle and furniture, and that all the said owners were and are
dwellers in Lubeck and subiects of that free State, and that the said
owners have all dwelt there above tenn yeeres, and this deponent was there
borne and soe as hee beleeveth were all the rest.

To the third hee saith some of the said owners built the said shipp and some
other of them have since inherited their parts by the death of their predecessors
who were builders, and this deponent on their behalfe over sighted the said
building and defraid the chardges thereof at their costs. And otherwise
hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid, and saving that hee hath knowne the
said Garrit ffalkus his shipp for about three yeares, and the shipp of the said
hendrick [?Caben] about five yeares, during which space they have belonged to
Lubeck where they were buit, and hee knoweth severall of their owners [?XX]
there but doth not nowe remember their names:

To the fourth hee saith that hee hath bin thrice at London
within this twelve moneth or thereabouts, and went from London to hamborough [?and]
from hamborough began this his outward voyage the time aforesaid for [?Bourdeaux]
and otherwise negatively for his shipp, touching the other shipps hee cannot
depose.

To the 5th hee saith that hee had three or foure barrells of wire aboard
at the time of the said seizure, and two hundred hogshead staves which were
laden the staves for this deponents, and the wire for his owners accompt and were
laden at hamburgh, and had noe other lading but ballast, and this deponent [?XXX]
halfe a dollar a peece for the same, and for the wire [?XXX]
sent him by his said owners from Lubeck. And otherwise hee cannot depose saving
as aforesaid.

To the 6th hee saith hee doubteth not of the restitution of the said shipp and goods
And otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.74r Annotate
To the seaventh hee answereth negatively.

To the 8th and 9. hee saith that hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, an otherwise
negatively for his part touching his shipp, And further touching other shipps hee
cannot depose saving as aforesaid./

To the 10th hee saith hee hath taken up noe money upon bottomrie, nor made any
assurance upon his said hogshead staves, and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 11th hee saith that hee signed three bills of lading all of one tenour for the said
wine, two whereof hee left with his owners correspondance at hamburgh and brought
the other alonge in the shipp, which with his passe and other papers were seized by
Captaine Myngs, And otherwise negatively for his part referring himselfe to his
foregoing deposition.

To the 12 hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the 13th hee saith hee arived in the River of Elve with his said shipp the ffortune
on the 22th of June last and went thither from London, And otherwise hee
cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 14th hee saith that the said John Detree is commonly accompted a hamburger
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 15th hee saith that the said hendrick Mittendorp bought his said eighth part
of hendrick [?Ludeman] of hamborough about [?tXX] monethes since, and the rest
have had their parts for theise seaven yeares last or thereabouts and some longer

To the last ee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And further cannot
depose.

[?JXXXXX ?dXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three
Judges
----
The third of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

2

Zachary Milde of hamborough Mariner Master of the shipp
the Saint Anthony of hamborough, aged 26 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that the shipps
specified in the description of the cause in the said allegation namely the Mercury
John [?detree] Master, the hope hendrick Martins master, the ffortune
Barent Verdonck master, the Carpfanger Barent Jacobsen master, the
Prophet Elias Simon Cornelison master, the king david, Jacob Younge
master, the Saint Mathijas Claus Billie[?t] master, the Brewer Claus
Van Reton master, the Kinge david Witte Witteson master, the fflora [?Bay]
Peters master, the ffortune hance Clauson master, the hope JOhn Peterson
master, and this deponents said shipp the Anthony all hamburge
shipps and masters, together with the ffortune of Lubeck Joacjim [?dunck] master
and two other Lubeckers and a Stralesunder sett saile together on the seaven
and twentieth of September last from the River of Elve bound for ffrance
some for Nantes others for Rochell and some for other places of that Nation
and this deponent was to fetch wine, brandewine and other goods thence
And that they soe set saile and departed without any Convoy or man
or men of warr with them, and that being in the North sea on saturday
next following their said departure they happened into the company
of three other merchant men who said they were alsoe bound for ffrance and
soe steered awaye with them, And this hee saith was and is true publique
and notorious.

To the second article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that upon the
sunday [?XXX] following there appeared two vessells in the Reare of the
sayd shipps, and saith about that tyme he this deponent saw a small vessell
which he taketh to be the dover frigott arlate aboard the sayd shipp Mercury
which, as hee hath since heard the master of the Mercury say did plunder
the sayd shipp. And further saith that upon the approach of the sayd
two shipps discovered in the rear as aforesayd the sayd dover frigott [?XXX]
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.74v Annotate
and the sayd two shipps (which att that tyme wore the dunkirke Colours
but the say following putt put the Prince of Orange his Colours) pursued
the sayd dover frigot. And further he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd two
shipps wearing the dunkirke Colours as aforesayd sayled after and
continued about a league on sterne of the sayd Hamburgh ffleet till about
three of the Clock in the afternoone, and about that tyme this
deponent observed two small vessells  which he tooke to be private
Men of war of England come into the sayd ffleet, and saw them
afterward upon discovery as he taketh it of the sayd two shipps
in the reare flee away one towards ffrance and the other towards
dover, and the sayd 2 vessells or shipps with the dunkerke Colours
pursued that small English private man of warr that fledd towards
the ffrench Coast, continueing all that afternoone att a good distance
to the reare of the sayd Hamburrow fleet. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the wind being
westerly the sayd Hamburgh ffleet made little way upon the Sunday
night so as the next morning the foresayd two shipps, which wore the
dunkerke colours upon the Sunday as aforesayd, were come up in the
sayd Hamburrow ffleet and then wore not or hadd out
any colours. And saith that, as it grew light that morning videlicet
Monday the third of October old stile, he this deponent saw in the
sayd ffleet a frigot of 16 gunnes of which one Errington was
Commander wearing the English colours, And saith that upon discovery
of the sayd frigot with English Colours the foresayd two shipps with
the Prince of Orange his Colours made chase after her and she fledd
before them with all the sayle she could make. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
two shipps without colours upon the Munday forenoone fott the
weather gage of the sayd ffleet and about nyne of the Clock the Elizabeth
frigot arlate appeared to the Westward of the sayd ffleet which
still held on their Course till the wind being short the sayd ffleet
was forced to tack about to and fro to gather wind boarding
to and fro in the English Channell and saith that the sayd
two shipps without Colours not overtaking the sayd Erringtons shipp
and espying as it seemes the Elizabeth frigott did putt out
the Prince of Oranges Colours and tacked upon the Elizabeth and at
last mett and exchanged a broadside with her. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the .6. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about two
howres before the sayd fight. and att the sayd ffight the foresayd
Hamburgh shipp had and wore out the Hamburgh Colours and the
sayd Lubeck shipps the Lubeckes Colours and saith it was then so calme
that the winde would not beare out the sayd Colours so as the Company
of the sayd ffleet did many of them spread out their Colours with [?XXXX]
that the Elizabeth frigot might take notice of them as [?freinds]
and saith the premisses notwithstanding the Elizabeth frigot chased
them, And the sayd ffleet immediately struck their sayles, and [?XXX]
attempted
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.75r Annotate
attempted to flee but submitted themselves, and most of the masters
in their shipps went aboard the Elizabeth And saith the sayd
ffleet nor any of them did not anyway assist the sayd 2 shipps that
fought against the Elizabeth nor had they or any of them that ever this deponent
heard any discourse with them or eyther of them. And otherwise he
cannot depose, saving he saith the sayd ffleet had not any intention
to resist or fight the sayd English shipp as he beleiveth.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation he saith he hath heard it
commonly reported on the Exchange att Hamburgh that the arlate John Baptista
Yonker, Adrian Yonker Bartel Beakeman and Arne da Greave did
about 3 moneths now past buy the sayd ship Mercurius att Hamburgh
and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the arlate ship the
Brewer whereof Claes van Reton is master, and the King David whereof
Witte Witteson is master, and the Saint Anthony whereof this deponent was and is
Master doe all belong to the sayd Port of Hamburgh where their Owners
doe all Inhabite, and the sayd shipps came now from Hamburgh sett
out by Hamburghers who had the quiet possession thereof and thither
should have returned agayne for the Accompt of Hamburghers
and saith noe subiect of the States of the United Provinces had or
hath any interest in the sayd three shipps nor any of them and that hee
knoweth the premises being the Master of the Saint Anthony and by
frequent conversation and discourse with merchants and others of
Hamburgh interessed in the sayd shipps. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the (sic) sayd Jacques Martin who as is sayd hath some goods laden
aboard the sayd shipps the Brewer and King David, hath for about
six yeares of this deponents knowledge bene an Inhabitant of Hamburgh
and for many yeares before by common repute. and otherwise he cannot
depose saving that the sayd Martin speaketh the ffrench tongue well
and saving that the sayd Martin is a Burgher of Hamburgh and
a subiect of the free State thereof and so accounted.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first he saith he is master of the Saint Anthony and so hath bene since
May last and came first aboard her att Amsterdam and was in her att
the tyme of seizure.

To the 2. he saith that William Vreda is owner of 1/8 part of the sayd shipp
the Anthony William de Hartech of 1/8 part Rodolph Bearnberg of 1/8 part
Derrick Dobbler of 1/8th part and Jurgen Ulkin of 1/8 part Albert
Eylars of 1/16 part. Jan Eylders of 1/16 part. Berre Jacobson Carpfanger
of 1/16th part. Otto Paep of 1/16 part. Jan Mildew of 1/16 part and
this deponent of 1/16 part. and saith the sayd persons are all Hamburgh
borne and there have lived all their tyme and the sayd William Vreda and
William de Hartech live in the Ryck street. Rodolp Bearnbar in the Bakers
street. Jurgen Ulkin and Derrick Dobbler in the New burgh. Otto
Paep Berne Jacobson Carpfanger and this deponent and Jan Eylers in the
Kaerweder Jan Mildew in the Hospitall and Albert Eylars
in the Dyck street. And otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions
he cannor depose.

To the .3d he saith he hath knowne the shipp Mercury [?this] yeare, and
the fortune Bernard Verdunck Master, about 3 yeares, and the Carfanger
Barent Jacobson Carfanger master 2 yeares which sayd 2 shipps were built
in Holland, and the prophet Elias Simon Cornelison master 3 yeares
which was built in Holland, and the King David Witte Witteson master [?one] yeare and
the Matthias Claus Belliet master one yeare. and the Brewer Claes
von
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.75v Annotate
Van Reyton master one yeare, the King David Jacob Young master
as long as he can remember, and the sayd shipp Saint Anthony this deponent
master since May last, and saith he this Rendent for and on the
behalfe of the foresayd Owners of the sayd shipp did att Amsterdam
about May last buy the same of a merchant of Amsterdam whose
name he remembreth not for 7000 guilders which moneyes this
Rendent payd to the sayd merchant for the sayd shipp and saith
there was a bill of sale made of and for the sayd shipp whereto this
deponent was privy and present att the making thereof. And otherwise
he cannot depose, saving he hath knowne the fflora Boyes Peters master
this yeare, the fortune Hans Clauson aster about 5 yeares, the  Hope
John Peterson master this voyage onely./

To the fourth he saith that since the beginning of May 1652 and
since till May 1653. the sayd shipp King David Witte Witteson Master
and the Anthony this Rendent master did belong to Amsterdam in Holland
and otherwise referring himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he
cannot depose saving that the sayd shipp Saint Anthony was bound for
Rochall in ffrance.

To the fifth he saith there was laden aboard the sayd shipp Sain Anthony a horse for
the Accompt of the sayd Jurgan, and one hundred deale boards for
this Rendents Accompt who bought the same of Roger Stubbs of Hamburgh
for 20 Ryx dollars, att Hamburg and there payd the sayd moneyes
for them in July last and did himselfe lade the same for his owne
Accompt. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith he was borne at Hamburgh and inhabites
there and is owner of the sayd deales and 1/16 part of the shipp
Anthony of which he hopeth to have restitution

To the 7. negatively to every part thereof.

To the .8. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .9. he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 10. he saith he knwoeth nothing thereof

To the .11. he saith he had severall writings aboard the sayd shipp the
Anthony at the tyme of the seizure thereof all which are now as
he beleeveth in the Registry of this Court and further cannot
depose saving that noe papers were att any tyme since the Anthony
came from Hamburgh torne throwne overboard burnt or any wayes
concealed.

To the 12. e saith he knoweth not from whence the Hope Martin ][?MXXXX]
master or Salvador or Starr or any of them came nor whither bound or
whither to returne.

To the 13. he saith the Saint Anthony, Carfanger, King David Witte
Witteson Master and the ffortune Bernard Verdunck master were all
built in Holland, and further saving his foregoeing depositions
he cannot depose, saving that the Saint Anthony came into the Elva about May last

To the .14. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .15. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than he hath deposed

To the .16. he saith that the respective masters of the sau=yd shipp
have bene masters thereof respectively for so long tyme as this
deponent hath knowne the sayd shippes according to his declaration
above sayd whereto he referreth himselfe.

[?XXXX XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE. LH SIDE]
[?XXXXX XXXX] [SIGNATURE. LH SIDE]
----
The fourth day of November 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Witte Wittens of Hamburgh Mariner Master of
the sayd shipp King David aged 25 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.76r Annotate
To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
arlate shipps hereafter mentioned did sett sayle together from the Elve of
Hamburgh, bound for france some for Rochell some to Nantes and
others for other ports for wynes upon the 27th day of September
last past, that is to say. the Mercury John Detree master The hope Hendrick Marens
Master. the ffortune Bernard Bardaynke Master. the Carp fanger Barent Jacobson Master
The Prophet Elias Simon Cornelison master the King David Jacob Young master Saint Mathias
Claus Billiet Master Brewer Claus van Raton Master the King David this deponent
Master Saint Anthony Zacharias Mielde Master the fflower Boy Peters master. the fortune
Joachim Dowke Master the ffortune of Stralsund. The Hope of Lubeck
Hendrick Caven Master a shipp whereof Gerdt ffalcas was Master, and saith
the ssayd shipps came out without any Convoy or men of warr with them
and that the first day of October being Saturday as he taketh it as they
were in the North seas in their direct Course for ffrance, the Hope of
Dantsick, one Lubecker and the Starr of Emden Peter Eppen master ipyned
with the sayd ffleet and sayle along in Company with them. And
knoweth the premisses being then in the sayd ffleet mast of the King
David as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second and third Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon
Sunday morning being as he taketh it the second of October last past
a small English Caper fell into the sayd ffleet and as he hath heard did
plunder the sayd shipp Mercury and in the forenoone of the same
day two shipps were discovered in the reare of the sayd ffleet
but knoweth not what colors they or eyther of them had, and they
upon the discovery of the foresayd English Caper seemed to pursue
him, but continued all that day neere a league to the sterne of the
sayd ffleet. And saith that about 3 in the afternoone a small English
frigot and an English Galliott happened into the sayd ffleet upon
the discovery whereof the sayd two shipps in the reare made after
the sayd frigot flying before them, to the Leeward before the wind
towards the ffrench Coast and the sayd galliott towards the English
Coast, and the sayd two shipps in the reare continued all that day
att a good distance from the sayd Hamburgh ffleet. All which he knoweth
for the reasons aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose, saving that the
premisses happened in the English Channell betweene Dover and
Calice and to the westward.

To the fourth and fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the
sayd Sunday night and the next day the wind being full westerly and contrary
to the said Hamburgh ffleet they made little way so as upon the Munday
morning the third of October as he taketh it the sayd 2 shippes formerly in
the reare were come upp into the sayd ffleet. and the same day another
English frigott with about 16 gunnes came neere the sayd ffleet
upon discovery of which frigott the sayd 2 shippes made a pursuit
after her, And saith that the wind being contrary the sayd ffleet
was forced to tack about too and fro to gather wind for their course
and about eight in the morning of the sayd Munday the Elizabeth frigot
was discovered sailing directly before the wind upon the discovery
whereof the foresayd two shipps putt on the Aurange Colours and made
towards
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.76v Annotate
towards her and mett and exchanged their broad sides with her; all
which this deponent well saw and observed. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the.6.th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that during the
sayd fight and for a good space before the sayd Hamburgh vessells
had out the Hamburgh Colours and the Lubeck shipps the Lubeck Colours
and that the wind was so still and calme that it would bot beare out
their sayd Colours so as diverse of them and this deponent amongst
the rest awas forced to stretch out the sayd Colours that they might be
seene and discovered by the Elizabeth. and saith that the sayd
Hamburgh ffleet had nothing to doe with the sayd shipps with
the Orenge Colours, and did never assist them but willingly submitted
to them and most of the masters of the sayd shipps went on board
the Elizabeth and delivered upp their papers and made knowne
their voyage and designe, and as this deponent beleiveth they nor
any of them had any designe or interest to resist the sayd English
frigot or to assist the sayd 2 shipps with the Aurange Colours.
and otherwise he cannot depose

To the .7.th article he saith he hath heard by discourse upon the Exchange
att Hamburgh that John Baptista Yonker Adrian Yonker Bartoll
Beakemand and Anne de Greave were owners of the sayd shipp
the Mercury and otherwise cannot depose./

To the eighth hee saith that the said shipps the Brewer of hamborough
(Claus van Reten master) the kinge david (whereof this deponent Witte Witteson is master) and the Saint
Anthony, Zachary Milde master doe all belonge to hamborough, and this
deponents said owners dwell all at hamborough, and hee knoweth one of [?the]
owners of the Saint Anthony to be there alsoe dwelling, namely Albert [?EleX]
who is alsoe one of this deponents owners, and the said shipps were [?sent]
thene and came thence together , and that after the said voyage this deponents
said shipp was to retourne thither, where before her departure shee were in
the possession of her said owners, and that is usuall for hamburgers to [?build]
and cause shipps to be built in holland, and that noe hollander or
ffrench man hath any interest in this deponents said shipp.

To the 9th hee saith that the arlate Jaques Martin dwelleth in Hamborough
where this deponent hath knowne him to be dwelling for theise 8 or 9 yeares
last past, annd saith hee the said Jaques was and is a subiect of the
said free state of Hamburgh, and that hee hath bin a Hamburger
there for all the said time and hath children and familie there but his [?wife]
is dead, And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith that hee hath bin master  of the said shipp ever since the
Springe last, at which time hee bought her at Amsterdam for his owners for
hamborough, and at Amsterdam came first aboard her, And
otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the second hee saith that Matthias Paulus is owner of an eighth part
of the said shipp, John Johnson of a quarter part, the widowe and heirs
of Joosten Overbeke of an eight part, Hance Distell of an eighth part
Albert [?Elers] of an eighth part. Jacques Martin of an eighth part
Derrick Cloppenburgh of a 16th part, and this deponent of a 16th part
and that they were and are all Hamburgers and there dwelling and subiects of
that free state and have all lived longe there. And otherwise hee cannot depose
saving this deponent was borne at Hamborough.

To the 3 hee saith that hee bought the said shipp of a hollander at Amsterdam
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.77r Annotate
and paid him 5950 gilders for the same, and thereupon tooke possesion of the
said vessell with out any bill of sale, but had only an acquittance of him for the
receipt of the money.

To the fourth hee saith hee was to goe this voyage with his said shipp to Rochell
or Bourdeaux, and otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 5th hee saith that hee is in ballast saving thirie barrells of tinne and
two parcells of Muscovie hides, and two barrells of sugar, which were laden aboard
him by the said Jaques Martin one of his owners and for his accompt, and to be
delivered to Jaques Nicholas his the said Martins factor at Rochell, And otherwise
hee cannot depose,

To the 6th hee saith that hee shall have proffit by the restitution of the said
shipp having as aforesaid a part therein, And otherwise negatively saving
his foregoeing deposition.

To the 7th negatively.

To the 8th negatively for his shapp and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 9th negatively.

To the 10th negatively for this deponents aid shipp and otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the 11th hee saith hee signed three bills of lading for the said goods all
of one tenour, one whereof hee brought alonge in the shippe, and the same
with his passe and other writings came upon the said seizure to the hands
of Captaine Mings, and otherwise negatively for his part.

To the 12 hee cannot depose.

To the 13 hee saith this deponents said shipp is Hollands built, and otherwise
hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 15 hee saith his said owners have only had the said shipp from the springe
last past at which time this deponent as aforesaid bought her at Amsterdam
for them, and was put master of her by them. And referreth himselfe to his
foregoing deposition and otherwise cannot depose.

[?XXXX XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

4

'Hendrick Martenson' of Hamborough Mariner master
of the shipp the Hope aged 29 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first article hee satith and deposeth that the shipp the Hope of
Hamborough allegate whereof this deponent is master and other shipps mentioned
in the description of the cause in the said allegation namely the Mercury John
Detree master, the ffortune Barent Verdunck master, the Carpfanger Barent
Jacobson master, the Prophet Elias Simon Cornelison master, the kinge david Jacob
Young of hamborough master, the Saint Matthias Claus Billiet master, the Brewer
Claus Van Reten master, the king david Witte Witteson master, the SaintAnthony
Zacharie Milde master, the fflora Roy Peters master, the ffortune hance Claeson
master, the hope John Peterson master all hamborough shipps and masters, with
Joachim dowke in the ffortune of Lubeck, the Gulden of Lubeck Gerit ffalous
master, the hope of the same hendricke Caven master, and a Straksunder
set saile in company from the River of Elve bound for severall ports of ffrance
on the 27th of September last without any Convoy or men of warr with
them, and upon the satturday next following their said departure they
in the North sea as they were in their course for ffrance, happened into the
company of three other shipps, namely the hope of dantzicke Martin [?XXXXX] master
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.77v Annotate
the Starr of Embden Peter [?Exter] master, and another shipp of Lubeck
whereof hendrick [?dunner] was master who were alsoe bound for ffrance
as they said, and sailed alonge with the said other shipps that came from the
Elve towards ffrance, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second hee saith and deposeth that the sunday morning next following
the premisses, there apeared asterne of the said fleete two shipps, [?with] a private
man of warr that was plundring aboard the Mercury aforesaid espying, [?XXXX]
[?XXX] then one of the said shipps appearinge asterne comming up to the Saint [?MXXX]
that was in the sterne went aboard her. And therwise hee cannot depose.

To the third fourth fifth and sixth articles hee saith and deposeth that in the
afternoone of the said sunday there came with the winde upon the said [?XXX]
an English private man of warre and came aboard this deponent and [?others]
of the shipps of the said fleete, which said two shipps seeing, made saile
towards him, and her flying towards the ffrench coast the said two
shipps, which by this time this deponent and others of the ffleete perceived to
be shipps of holland or zealand, and saith that before the said chase [?XXX]
the said two shipps kept at a distance from the said fleete, and [?when] [?they]
soe chased the said private man of warr the said fleete kept on their
course aswell as the[?y] could in that winde which was contrary. And [?that]
the monday morning next following the premisses the said two men
of warr appeared againe, and shortlty after breake of day there appeared an
English shipp commeing downe the winde, after which the said two dutch men
of warr stood, and about noone the Elizabeth frigot appearing to
the Westward, the said two shipp stood towards her, and after exchanging
some shotts, passed away, and soe the said Elizabeth came 

To the seaventh hee saith that the arlate John Baptista Yoncker, Adrian
Yoncker, Bartle Beakeman and Anne de Greave bought the said shipp
the Mercury at Hamborough about three monethes since which hee knoweth
being acquainted therewith and being told alsoe thereof by this deponents
brother who was broker in the matter, and ever since they have bin and are
commonly accompted her owners; and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 8th hee saith that the said three shipps arlate the Brewer the
King David and the Saint Anthony  (which hee saith were taken in the [?XXX]
fleete) were commonly accompted to belonge to Hamborough  [?XXXXXXX]
[?XXXXX]. And saith he Hamburgers often buy and build shipps in
Holland. And other wise hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee saith hee knoweth one Jaques Martin living in Hamburg
with his children and familie but his wife is dead, and saith this
deponent hath there knowne him dwelling ten or eleaven yeares last past
which space hee hath bin and is a subiect of the States, And otherwise
hee cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.78r Annotate
To the Interrogatories:

To the first 2. and 3 hee saith hee hath bin master of his said shipp the Hope about
8 yeeres last, which hee soe longe since bought at Lubeck of one John
[?DourlaX] for accompt of this deponents owners, who are still owners of her
and were and are Hamburgers there living and there borne and subiects of that
state, and were and are by name Adrian Yonker owner of a halfe part,
Michaell Hensh of a quarter part, Derrick de Dobblaer of an eighth
and this deponents father Joachim Miertins of a sixteenth and this deponent
of a sixteenth part, and this deponent came first aboard her at Lubeck the
time aforesaid, this deponent on behalfe of his said owners paid 15200
markes Lubecke for the said shipp, and had a bill of sale thereof which is
at Hamburgh. And otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the fourth hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and otherwise
cannot depose, saving this deponents said shipp hath never bin in holland
since hee had her as aforesaid.

To the 5 hee saith hee is in ballast and hath noe lading aboard.

To the 6 hee saith hee was borne at hamborough and that his shipp
being freed will be profitable unto him for that then hee may persue
his voyage, and that otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 7th hee answereth negatively.

To the 8 and 9 negatively for his part and shipp, and otherwise cannot answer
saving as aforesaid.

To the 10th negatively for his shipp and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 11th hee saith hee had his seabriefe and certificate and some letters aboard
which were seized and since brought into this Court, And otherwise negatively
for his part.

To the 12 hee cannot depose

To the 13th hee came into the Elve fron his last voyage the 20th of July last
and otherwise hee cannot answer saving his foregoing deposition whereunto hee
referreth himselfe.

To the 14 hee cannot depose.

To the 15 hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition [?for] his shipp and otherwise
cannot answer.

To the last hee was constituted master by his said owners, And
otherwise gee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

per
Simrick [?Martens] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three Judges.
----
The [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] day of November 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

5

John detrye of Hamburgh Mariner master of
the sayd shipp the Mercury aged two and thirty yeares
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the 27th day
of September 1653 last past the shipps arlate hereafter named sett sayle
together in one fleet out of the Elve without any Convoy or men of warr with them upon a merchandizing voyage some
for ffrance for wines that is to say the Mercury this deponent master, the
Hope, Hendrick Martin Master The fortune Bernard Verdunck Master the Carpefanger
Barent Jacobson Carpfanger Master The Prophet Elias Simon Cornelison Prophet Master
The King David Jacob Young Master The Saint Mathias Claus Billet Master The Brewer
Claus Van [?Baton] Master The King David Witte Witteson Master the Saint Anthony Zachary
[?Milde] Master the fflora Boy Peters Master the fortune of Hamburgh [?Hans] Claeson
Master The Hope John Peterson Master The Fortune of Lubeck Jochim dunke Master
the fortune of Stralsun one Gallantine Master the Hope of Lubeck Hendrick
[?Cove] Master the Gideon Gerde ffalcus Maser and saith that being in their Course
for france in the North Sea the Hope of dantzisck Martin [?Miner] Master the [?Salvator]
of Lubeck Hendrick [?Dunner] Master The Starr of Embden Peter Eppen Master mett and
ioyned with the sayd ffleet on or about the 1 of October being Saturday And otherwise
cannot depose,
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.78v Annotate
To the second third fourth fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that upon Sunday the second of October 1653 and not before This deponent
did discover farr asterne of the sayd ffleet two shippes which afterwards
proved to be Hollands men of warr, and in the morning of thesayd Sunday
a private English man of warr came aboard this deponents shipp and  plundered
and tooke from him 18. Ryx dollars in money two hundred and off weight
of Rope with his Cloathes and sea Instruments to the value of 10 li 10 s sterling
who upon discovery of an Ostender bringig with him a Portuguese prize
whom he tooke to be a Hollander fledd; And that the foresayd 2 shipps a
sterne as aforesayd continued all that day neere a dutch myle from the sayd
fleet, [?XXX] shich two English vessells  comeing in the afternoone were
chaced by the sayd 2 shipps that proved afterwards to be Hollanders.
And moreover saith that the wind being the sayd Sunday night westerly the
foresayd ffleet made little way and the 2 Holland shipps upom the
Munday morning morning came upp with the sayd ffleet, and gave chase
to a private Caper of Capttaine Phillips, till such tyme as the Elizabeth
frigot commannded by Captaine Myns came in sight to the westward of
the sayd ffleet. And saith the wind upon the sayd Munday and particularly
before and att the tyme of the discovery of the Elizabeth being westward
and contrary to the sayd ffleet, they were forced to tack to and fro
to gather wind one while towards the English Coast, and anon towards
the ffrench Coast, and saith that about midday of the saud Munday the
Elizabeth comeing directly before the wind and being as it seemed
discovered to be  an English frigot the foresayd Holland shipps [?gave ?upp]
the pursuit of Captaine Phillipps his private Caper and putting out the
Hollands Colours made upp towards the Elizabeth and exchanged
broadside with her, and thereby first discovered themselves to be men
of warr of Holland. And saith that during the sayd fight and  [?before]
and indeed from the first discovery of the Elizabeth the foresayd Hamburgh
shipps putt out their Hamburgher colours and the Lubeckers the Lubeck colours
howbeit by reason of the slacknes of the wind the sayd colours were not [?XXXX]
but were forced to be stretched out and extended upon stretchers on
purpose that the Elizabeth might discerne them to be freinds, And saith
that the said ffleet had not any thing to doe with the sayd dutch men of
warr yet notwithstanding the Elizabeth frigot bore in upon them and
shott att them, and the sayd ffleet struck, and willingly submitted themselves
and did not offer any resistance against the Elizabeth nor give any assistance
to the sayd Hollanders, but saith the premisses notwithstanding the sayd Captaine
Minns did seize and deteyne the sayd ffleet all which he well [?XXX]
saw and observed and further cannot depose.

To the .7th. article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith That John Baptista
Yonker Adrian Yonker Bartel Beakman and Anne de Greave did on
or about the 11th day of August .1653. buy the sayd shipp the Mercury of
Hamburgh for their owne use of one Jacob Dirrickson who brought
thither a shipps lading of wynes from Nantes, and they have ever since
bene and still are lawfull owners thereof, and sett out the same to [?sea]
and lett her out to freight by Charter party to Abraham van [?dam]
Daniell Deville and others all Hamburghers for a voyage to [?Nantes]
for french wynes, and they the sayd freighters did lade aboard [?her]
Empty pipes in the sayd shipp. the premisses he knoweth being master
of the said shipp, and privy to the whole voyage and design And
further saving his subsequent depositions cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.79r Annotate
To the eight article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate shipps the
Brewer Claus Reton Master King David Witte Witteson Master and Saint Anthony
Zachary Mielde Master doe all belong to the Port of Hamburgh and came out
of the Elve in Company of the rest of the ffleet and he hath credibly heard and
verily beleiveth that all the Owners of the sayd shipps were and are Hamburghers
and that the sayd shipps are now employed for the Accompt of Hamburghers
and that noe subiect of the States of the United Provinces had or hath
any share or interest therein, or in any of them. And further cannot depose
saving he saith, It is very usuall for Hamburghers and Lubeckers to buy
and build shippes for their owne use and Accompt in Holland.

To the nynth article he saith he knoweth well the arlate Jaques Martin
who is as he saith an Inhabitant of Hamburgh and hath his howse
there, and hath had his wife there, who is since dead and saith
he speakes good dutch and french, and this deponent hath knowne him
an Inhabitant of Hamburgh about 11. or 12 yeares. and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. he saith he is master of the Mercury and so hath bene from the
11th of August last and came first aboard att Hamburgh and was in her
att the tyme of seizure:

To the 2. he saith that the Owners of the sayd shipp the Mercury are all
Hamburghers and subiects of the free state of Hamburgh and there have
lived all their tymes, and their names shares and dwellings are as
followeth. videlicet John Baptista Younker. of 1/8 part thereof. Adrian Yonker of
1/8th part. Bartall Beakman of 1/8th part. Anne da Greave of 4/8 parts and 1/16
part. and this deponent of 1/16 part. and are all of them inhabitants and
dwellers in Hamburgh as aforesayd: And saith the sayd Adrian Yonker is
owner of 1/2 of the Hope Hendrick Martin Master and Dirick Dubbler and
Michell Huise and sayd Skipper Hendrick Martin are likewise partowners of
the sayd shipp Hope. and the sayd Adrian Yonker Dirrick Dubbler and Berent
Vordunke and Jan Martinsdorp Master of the Saint George one of the 3 Sylver
ships are Owners of the fortune Berent Vordunke master./ and saith
that Welconz Vreda is one of the Owners of the Saint Anthony Zachary Mielde
Master and Jorez Luyders part owner of the Brewer Claus vom Roton Master, and Albert Meyer
is one of the Owners of the Saint Mathias Claes Billiot Master And saith the Owners
and Skippers of all the sayd shippes now declared are Hamburghers subiects
of the free State of Hamburgh and there have lived all their tymes
And further cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp Mercury from August last. the Hope Hendrick
Martins Master .7 or 8 yeares. the fortune aforesayd Bernard von Dunke Master .5 or 6.
yeares the Carpe fanger aforesayd 18 monethes. the sayd Prophet Elias 2 yeares
the King David Jacob Young Master 12 yeares. the Saint Mathias aforesayd 3. monethes. the Brewer
aforesayd .12 monethes. King David Witte Witteson Master .3 monethes. the sayd Anthony
aforesayd 3 monethes the fflora aforesayd .3 monethes. the fortune Hans
Clauson Master 5 yeares. The Hope Jan Peterson Master. 3 monethes. the fortune
Joachim Dowke Master. 12 monethes: the fortune of Stralsundt 2 monethes: the Hope of
Lubeck and Gedern Starr and Salvador aforesayd from October last past. And saith
he this deponent and the Owners of the Mercury aforesayd
did: 11. August last att Hamburgh buy the sayd shipp of Jacob Dirrickson
for 4440 Ryxdollars which moneyes hee did see payd to the sayd Dirrickson by
the Officers of the Banke in Hamburgh by order from the sayd owners for the sayd shipp
and this deponent saw the sayd dirickson signe and make an Acquittance
to the sayd owners in full discharge of the sayd summe of 4440. Ryxdollars  and othewise hee
cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.79v Annotate
To the 4th he saith that he hath heard and beleiveth that the King David
Witte Witteson master, and Saint Anthony Zachary Mielde master were since May [?1652, or ?1653]
bought by the present owners thereof att Amsterdam or some other port of Holland
and further referring himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he cannot answer.

To the .5. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof saving this deponent hath [?XX]
those aboard the Mercury which he bought in Hamburgh market and payed for the same 28 [?XXX]

To the .6. he saith he is a native of Hamburgh and there  dwells. and hath 1/16 part of
the Mercury and the cheeses aboard the sayd shipp as aforesayd, which he [?hopeth]
will be restored to him. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .7. negatively.

To the .8. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .9. he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .10. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .11th he saith there were severall Seabriefes and other papers aboard
the sayd shipps att the tyme of seizure which were delivered to Captaine [?Minns]
aforesaid: and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 12th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith the Mercury aforesayd came into the Elve in the [?Spring]
last. And further saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose

To the .14. he saith that Jacob Dirickson a Hollander brought the
shipp Mercury to Hamburgh, and beleiveth he so brought her from Roan
in ffrance and further cannot depose.

To the 15. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 16 he saith he this deponent hath bene master of the Mercury 3 monethes and
was so appoynted by his foresayd Owners and tooke first charge thereof on the
11. of August last att Hamburg. and Hendrick Martins hath bene master
of the Hope 7 or 8 yeares, and was so appoynted by his owners aforesayd, and
Berend Verdunke of the fortune 4 or 5. yeare. and Berent Jacobson
of the Carpfanger about 18 monethes, Simon Cornelison of the Prophet Elias
about 3. yeares. Jacob Young of the King David about 3 . monethes, [?ClaXXX]
of the Saint Mathias about 3 monethes, Claes vom Roton of the Brewer about [?XX]
monethes of this deponents knowledge. Witte Witteson of the KIng David3 yeares
Zachary Mielde of the Saint Anthony about 3 or 4 monethes Boy Peters or the
fflora about 3 monethes Hans Claeson of the fortune of Hamburg 3
or 4 monethes Jan Peterson of the Hope about 3 monethes and saith the
persons have bene masters of the sayd shipps respectively for the
tymes respectively according to this deponents knowledge, but
some of them have not bene masters for a longe tyme he [?knoweth]
not. And further he cannot depose.

Johan Detry Hamburg [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.80r Annotate
R.R.

The 12th of October 1653:-

Gerit Simondson Vischer of Maeslans
Sluce in Holland Mariner late Master of the
said shipp the golden Lambe aged 40. yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined:/

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee this deponent was Master of the said
shipp the Goulden Lambe which is a shipp belonging to ffrans Cornelisen
Denick of Maesland Sluce where the said shipp was built about 8 yeares since by the direction
of the said frans Cornelison a Burgher there and a Subject to the States of
the United Provinces. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second hee referreth to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise cannot
depose

To the third hee saith hee and his shipps Companie are all Hollanders and
subjects of the States of the United Netherlands except one Hamburgher

To the fourth hee saith the Owner aforesaid hath from his infancie dwelt at
Maesland Sluce aforesaid. And saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot
otherwise depose./

To the 5. and 6th hee saith the said shipp was onely in her ballast when
shee was seized by the shipp the Mary (Captaine Welch Comander)
And saithj there were no bils of lading aboard. nd further deposeth not

To the 7.th hee saith hee hath been three ir foure voyages in ffrance with
his said shipp. And otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions hee cannot depose

To the 8.th hee saith the said shipp was now designed for Sonnwater in
Norway and was to end her voyage in Maesland Sluce/

To the 9.th hee saith hee had Holland Colours aboard the said shipp, and that
shee was taken upon the open seas. And saith hee saw the said Captaine Welch
his Commission aboard him/

To the 10.th negatively:-/

Gerret Sjmonson [?veeser] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges in Court:
----
The 12th day of October 1653:-/

Hugh Ryley and Companie Imployers of the shipp)
the Mary against the shipp the Goulden Hawke')
whereof Dirrick Dirrickson was Master Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories in preparation on
behalfe of the said Ryley and Companie

jus./

Dirrick Dirrickson Degenaer of Stockholme
in Sweden Master of the said shipp the Goulden
Hawke aged 34. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet:/

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.80v Annotate
To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, hee was Master of the said shipp the
Golden Hawke and that shee belongeth to the Port of Stockholme
and saith the Westerwicke Salt Companie residing at Stockholme
caiused the same to be built at Westerwick about 30. dutch miles from
Stockholme at their owne Costs and Charges as hee beleeveth, And
otherwise negatively:-/

To the second hee saith, the said Westerwick Salt Companie of Stockholme
have beene owners of the said shipp ever since shee was built, which was
in this present yeare. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the third hee saith hee is a Native of Vinnae in the Land of [??Cleve]
in Germanie, and his shipps Companie are all Swedes, except one [?Dane]
and three Hollanders, And that hee this examinate was bredd up at [Monickendam in [?Holland]

To the fourth hee saith the Owners of the sayd shipp live all at Stockholme, where
they have lived for theise ten yeares last past, and are Subjects to the [?Crowne]
of Sweden:-/:-

To the fifth hee saith the said shipp the Goulden Hawke is laden with
Copper, iron and Cannon bulletts which were laden at Stockholme about the
moneth of August last past by severall Merchants there, for their accompt
to be transported to Hamborough, and there to be delivered according to his
ffreight breifes found aboard his said shipp at the time of her late seizure
to which briefs hee referreth both for the Laders and the parties to whom the
said goods were consigned. And otherwise cannot depose./:-

To the 6th hee saith there were no bills of lading signed for the said goods and
Merchandizes, but onely fraight briefs for the same, which this deponent
together with all his other writings aboard delivered unto the sayd Captaine
Welch who seized his said shipp and goods, and otherwise negatively.

To the 7th hee saith he hath often been at severall Ports in Holland and
ffrance in severall Swedish shipps and was last there about two yeares since, And otherwise
referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and to the fraight brieds predeposed.

To the 8th hee saith hee was hired for Hamborough, and from thence to
returne to Stockholm, where the Voyage in question was to end, and saith hee
was to have 50. gilders per moneth for his wages, and to be paid at Stockholm
bu the Owners of the said salt Companie at his returne thither, And
otherwise cannot depose./:-

To the 9th hee saith hee had no other but Swedish Colors aboard his said shipp
which was taken neere the Riff off Jutland upon the open Sea by the sayd
Captaine Welsh, And saith hee saw no Commission from the said Captaine [?XX]
board him. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 10th hee saith there was no Charterpartie for the affraightment of the
shipp And otherwise cannot depose:/

[?XXXXXXXXXXXXXX] [?XXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.81r Annotate
The 13th day of October 1653:-

Ryley and Company against the shipp the Golden)
Hawke Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories in the preparatorie on the
behalfe of the parties ministrant

2us./

Claus Peterson of Pommerland in Holland
Mariner aged 39 yeares or therabouts, sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet:-

To the first hee saith hee knoweth the shipp the Golden Hawke, and
was one of the Common Seamen of her Companie, being received aboard her
at Vleckeren in Norway, And otherwise hee cannot depose, save hee hath
severall times heard the Master thereof say that shee belonged to Stockholme in
Sweden, and that her Owners were Swedes living at Stockholme./

To the second hee cannot depose, saving hee saw no moneys paid for the
said shipp or any part thereof./

To the third, hee saith That Dirrick Derrickson Master of the said shipp hath
formerly lived at Monickendam in Holland , and now is a Burgher of Stockholme
in Sweden as this deponent hath heard, and saith there were three Hollanders of the
sayd shipps Companie, the rest being Swedes as he beleeveth, and hee this deponent
is a Hollander as aforesaid/

To the 4th hee cannot otherwise depose, then he hath predeposed./

To the 5.th hee saith hee hath bin informed aboard the sayd shipp, that her lading
consisted in bulletts, iron and Copper laden and taken aboard her at Stockhome
and to be transported to Hamborough, And further hee cannot depose:-/

To the 6.th hee knoweth nothing thereof, saving hee saw no writings or papers
torne burnt throwne overboard or otherwise concealed; or imbeazeled:/

To the 7:th hee saith, hee hath been severall times in ffrance, and was at
Saint Martins neere Rochell about the beginning of August last, being master of
a Dutch shipp called the Waterdogge, which since hath bin cast away, and
this deponent and his shipps Companie gott aboard another Hollands shipp, wherein
they came to Vleeckeren in Norway aforesaid where hee this deponent and his
Stiersman were received aboard the said shipp the Hawke to goe for Hamburgh,
as the Master thereof then declared his designe and intention to bee. And
otherwise cannot depose:/

To the 8:th hee saith, hee this deponent was hired upon a Voage for Hamburgh
and was to be paid at Hamburgh for his paines, at the discretion of the said
Master or an different men. And further cannot depose:/

To the 9.th hee saith hee saw no other then two Swedish Colors aboard the
said shipp, and saith the said shipp was taken upon the open seas neare the
Riff towards the Coast of Jutland by one Captaine Welsh with a private man of
warr, and saith hee this deponent did not see any Commission the said Captaine had

To the 10.th hee knoweth nothing thereof.

Claus Päterß [SIGNATURE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.81v Annotate
The same day:

Examined upon the said Interrogatories:/

3us./

Amont Barentsen of Coppenhagen in
Denmarke Mariner aged 35. yeares or therabouts
sworne and examined saith as followeth videlicet/:-

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee hath knowne the shipp the Golden Hawke
interrate for about 5. weekes last past, about which time he was hired
in the Sound to come aboard her as an Ordinary Mariner to saile for Hamburgh
And saith the Master of the said shipp then told this deponent that his shipp
belonged to the Port of  Stockholm, and to Swedish Owners dwelling at
Stockholme. And further hee cannot depose./

To the 2.d hee saith hee did not see any moneys paid for the said shipp. And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 3. Interrogatorie hee saith, the Master of rge said shipp hath declared in
this deponents hearing that hee hath lived at Monickendam in Holland, and
that hee now is Burger of Stockholme in Sweden, and that hee this deponent is
a Dane living at Coppenhagen and a Subject to the King of Denmarke, and that the
rest of the shipps Companie, hee beleeveth are Swedes, except three who
are accompted Hollanders. And further hee cannot depose./

To the 4:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof/

To the 5th hee saith the said shipp is laden with iron Copper and bulletts
which as this deponent hath understood by the said Master were laden at
Stockholme, and were to be transported and delivered at Hamburg
And further hee cannot depose:/

To the 6:th hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 7:th hee saith, hee hath bin severall times and at severall ports and
places both in ffrance and Holland about 7. yeares since, And further
cannot depose./

To the 8th hee saith, hee this deponent was hired by the said Master at
Elsinore upon a voyage to Hamburgh, and from thence to returne with him
to Elsinore, for which the said Master paid unto him this deponet two weekes
in hand, and promised to pay him eight rix daollers more at their arrivall at
Hamburgh, and saith hee beleeveth the Voyage in question was to end at
Stockholme. And further hee cannot depose:-/

To the 9th hee saith this deponent saw no other then Swedish Colors aboard the
said shipp the Golden Hawke, and that shee was taken nere the [?Jutland]
Riff upon the open Seas, and saith that hee saw no Commission that Captaine [?XXXX]
the seizor had. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 10:th hee cannot depose:-

the marke of
Amont [UPSIDE DOWN ANCHOR] Barentson [MARKE, RH SIDE]

(The same day
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.82r Annotate
The same day:-/

Examined upon the said Interrogatories:-

4us./

Cornelius Peterson of Landsmore in the
Waterland in Holland Mariner aged 38 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet:/

To the first hee saith, hee this deponent about three weekes ame aboard
the shipp the Goulden Hawke of ffalcon at Vleckeren in Norway being
hired by the Master thereof to saile with him on his said shipp for an Ordinary
or Common Seaman to Hamborough, And saith hee hath heard the Master and
some of the Companie of the said shipp then declare, that the said shipp was come
from and belonged to the Port of Stockholme in Sweden, and to a Swedish
Companie there. And further hee cannot depose.

To the second hee saith hee knowethnothing thereof otherwise then aforesaid:

To the third hee saith, hee this deponent beleeveth the Master of the said shipp
to bee a Hollander by his speech, and that the said shipps Companie are Swedes
as hee beleeveth, except this deponent and two others which are Hollanders and
Subjects to the States of Holland. And further cannot depose:/

To the 4:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the particulars thereof

To the 5.th hee saith the said shipp is laden with iron Copper and bulletts, which
this deponent was informed by the said Master, were Laden at Stockholme, and
were to be transported to and delivered at Hamburgh, And further hee cannot
depose./

To the 6.th hee knoweth nothing thereof:-

T the 7:th hee saith hee hath bin severall times at Rochell and Bourdeaux
in ffrance with severall Hollands shipps, and was last at Saint Martins
about three moneths since in a Hollands shipp, which in her voyage from
thence towards Holland was cast away, and this deponent and the rest of her
Companie were preserved aboard another Hollands shipp on which they came to
Vleeckeren aforesaid, where this deponent was hired as aforesaid. And further
hee cannot depose./

To the 8:th hee saith hee this deponent was hired by the said Master upon a Voyage
from Vleckeren to Hamburgh, and expected such wages to be paid him at his
coming there, as the said Master should think fitt to allow him. And further
cannot depose:/

To the 9:th hee saith, hee onely saw one Swedish Colour aboard the said shipp, and no others
whatsoever, and saith the said shipp the Goulden Hawke was surprized and
taken by Captaine Welch interrate by the Riff ofJutland upon the open seas
And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 10:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof.

cornelis pietterß [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.82v Annotate
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories:-

5.tus/

Cornelius Nannesy of Holisloot in the
Waterland in Holland Mariner aged 34
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined saith
as followeth, videlicet:

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, That hee was hired and taken aboard
the shipp the Goulden Hawke interrate about a moneth since, as hee
now remembreth the time, at the Vlerckeren in Norway by dirick
derrickson the Master of the said shipp, for an ordinary seaman upon a
Voyage for Hamborough, And saith hee heard the said Master say that
his said shipp belonged to the Port of Stockholme; and that the Owners of
her dwelt there and that shee was built in Sweden. And otherwise hee
cannot depose:-/

To the second hee cannot otherwise depose then as by him is predeposed./

To the third hee saith, hee hath heard the Master of the said shipp
declare that hee had formely dwelt at Munnickendam in Holland
and that hee had his present place of aboade at Stockholme in Sweden
and beleeveth the rest of the said shipps Companie were Swedes, except this
deponent and 2. others who are Hollanders. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4.th hee referreth to his foregoeing deposition. And further cannot depose

To the 5.th hee saith hee hath heard the said Master day That the said shipps ladeing consisteth
of Copper iron and bullets taken in at Stockholme aforesaid and [?deXXX]
for Hamborough And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 6.th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 7.th hee saith hee hath beene severall times at Bayon Rochell and
Nantes in ffrance in severall Holland shipps, and was last at Rochell [?or]
Saint Martins in a shipp of Amsterdam called the Island of Texell, about
halfe a yeare agoe: And further cannot depose:-/

To the 9:th hee saith hee was hired upon a voyage from the Vleckeren to
Hamburgh, and saith hee was promised by the said Master to have wages
when hee should come to Hamburg according to the wages of those other [?XX]
Mariners which were come with him from Stockholme, And otherwise cannot
depose:-/

To the 9.th hee saith, There was one Swedish Colour or flagg aboard but
saith hee saw no Hollands or other kind of flaggs or Colours aboard the said
shipp, Which hee saith was surprized and taken neere the Jutland
Riff by one Captaine Welsh Commander of a private man of Warr
of this Nation, upon the wide and open sea, And knoweth not of any
Commission which the said Captaine had, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 10:th hee knoweth nothing thereof:/

Repeated with his precontest before)
doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin)

cornelis [?XXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

(The same day
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.83r Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Interrogatories./

6us./

Francis Laurenson of Stockholme in
Sweden mariner aged 19 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie he saith hee well knoweth the shipp the Hawke
interrate, whereof this deponent was Boateswaine, and saith shee belonged
to the Port of Stockholme, and to the Swedish salt Companie there resideing
by whose order shee was first built, and since lately altered and repaired
at Westerwick in Sweden, as this deponent hath there credibly heard
and verily beleeveth And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the second hee saith hee cannot otherwise depose, then as hee hath
predeposed, and saw no moneys payd for the said shipp or any part thereof

To the third hee saith hee beleeveth the Master interrate is a Hollander
borne, and saith that hee is now a Burger and Shipp master of Stockholme, and
that hee this deponent was borne in Holland, but hath lived ever since his
infancie at Stockholme in Sweden, and that hee and the said master are Subjects
of the Queene of Sweden, and the rest of the said shipps Companie are Swedes
except three Hollanders and two dane. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 4.th hee saith hee beleeveth that the said Swedish Salt Companie the
reputed Owner of the shipp aforesaid doe live at Stockholme in Sweden, And
further cannot depose:-/

To the 5.th hee saith the said shipp is laden with Iron Copper and bulletts
which were laden at Stockholme about 8. weekes since to be transported to
Hamburgh, and there to be delivered, this deponent having helped to lade the
same, and being hired by the said Master expressely to saile with him to Hamburgh
And otherwise hee cannot depose:-/

To the 6:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing at all thereof:/

To the 7.th hee saith he never was in ffrance, but hath bin at Amsterdam in
a Swedish shipp about 9. yeares since, And otherwise hee cannot depose:-

To the 8:th hee saith hee was hired by the said Master upon a voyage
from Stockholme to Hamburgh as aforesaid, and from thence to returne to
Stockholme where the voyage was to end, where this deponent according to
agreement was to receive 18. rixdollers from the said Master for the whole Voyage,
upon his returne thither. And further deposeth not.

To the 9:th hee saith there were no Holland, but onely two Swedish Colors
aboard the said shipp, which hee saith was taken upon the open seas neere the
Riff of Jutland by Captaine Welsh Commander of an English private man
of warr, but this deponent knoweth not of any Commission hee had. And
further cannot depose:-/

[?frans ?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin:-/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.83v Annotate
The 17th day of October .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Ryley and Companie against the shipp the)
Sharke et cetera. Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe of the sayd
Ryley and Companie

2us./

Corneluis Jansen of delfe-haven in Holland Mariner
aged 28. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first hee saith the shipp or vessell the Sharke inerate is of Delfs
haven in Holland and this deponent was foremast man aboard her, and taketh
the Owner thereof is Marinas Thommnisen of Delfshaven in Holland. And otherwise
cannot depose:-

To the second hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And otherwise negatively
and further cannot depose/

To the third hee saith, the late Master of the said shipp was Gerrir Jansen of
Delfshaven in Holland, and all the rest of the said shipps Companie were and
are Hollanders and Subjects to the States of the United Provinces:/

To the 5th hee saith the said shipps ladeing consisteth of seaventeene lasts and a
halfe of pickeld herring taken at sea by the industry of the said master and company
to be transported to Delfshaven and delivered to Marinus Thunison aforesaid

To the 6;th hee knoweth nothing thereof:-

To the 7:th hee saith hee hath been in ffrance severall yeares since in a shipp belonging
to the Owners aforesaid And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee saith hee
cannot depose:-/

To the 8:th hee was hired at Delfshaven upon a ffishing Voyage which was to
end there and was to have 4. gilders and 1/2 per weeke, att his returne thither

To the 9. hee saith. they had onely Hollands Colors aboard, and that the
shipp was taken upon the open seas not farr from Yarmouth by the river, Captaine
Welsh, And otherwise negatively:

To the 10:th hee knoweth nothing thereof,/

te marke of
Cornelies [MARKE] Jansen [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Mr Cocke:/
----
The 27th of October 1653.

Riley and company against the shipp the)
Peice aforesaid Claes Smalts master.)

4

Jurian Johnson of Warens neere [?SXXXX]
in ffreezland, aged 32 yeares or thereabouts 
stiersman of the said shipp the Peece, sworne
and examined as aforesaid.

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee
well knoweth the said shipp the Peace, and hath bin stiersman of her
about a moneth last past and came first aboard her in the sound about
soe longe since, and saith shee belongeth to the port of Wismar in the
Dominion of the Queene of Sweden as hee hath bin informed by [?their]
master and others of her company, not knowing further touching the [?XX]
Interrogatories, for hee saith hee had bin noe longer in her then as aforesaid.

To the third hee saith that hee this deponent is a ffreezlander and a
subiect of the States of the united Netherlands, and the master is of
Wism[?ere]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.84r Annotate
Wismar and the rest of the company Easterlings. And otherwise hee cannot depose
saving as aforesaid.

To the fourth hee saith hee knoweth not who are owners of the said shipp nor
where they dwelle/

To the fifth hee saith that the said shipps lading consists in clapboard laden as
hee was informed at Riga to be transported for Bordeauxm for which place this
deponent was hired in the Sound as the said shipp outwards bound came with
the said lading. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 6th hee saith hee knoweth not of any papers aboard, nor of
any made away.

To the 7th hee saith hee hath bin in ffrance and holland in other shipps but
never in the Peace, and otherwise hee knoweth not the person to whom
the said lading was consigned, nor knoweth ought of the correspondence of the
same.

To the 8th hee saith that hee was agreed with by the master to serve in the
said shipp to Bordeaux, and thence to hamborough and there to end the
voyage, and was to have 60 Rix dollars for the voyage, halfe whereof
hee received in hand of the said master.

To the 9th hee saith there was a Swedish and a wismar flagg aboard but
noe hollands colours that hee knoweth of, and that the said seizure was
made on the coast of Norway on the open sea by Captaine Welch.

To the last hee cannot depose.

Jurian Jans [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT]
----
The last of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Crandley and company against the shipp the)
Saint John Baptist whereof harman Garells)
was and is master. Smith.)

dt.

Harman Garrells of Embden Mariner
Master of the said shipp the Saint John Baptist
aged 31 yeares or thereabouts, sworne the day
aforesaid as in the acts of Court, and examined
upon certaine Interrogatories ministred on the behalfe
of the said Captaine Crandley and company
saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee hath bin master of the
said shipp the Saint John Baptist for theise three yeares last past and upward, during
which time shee hath belonged and doth at present belong to Embden, and
that her owners dwell there and have soe done for all the said time and
have bin and are burgers and Inhabitants of Embden and subiects
of that free State, and all borne in the towne and libertie thereof that the said owners were and are by name Gadard
Borovall, John Gossens, Hendrick Johnson Mayris, Lambert van Ham,
[?Tado] Reyus,Jacob Clauson Eylers, Lambert Cremer, Hendrick Lemers,
John Scudirke, Etsle Oben, Hendrick Dadden, Here Helling, Tise
Woulders, John Scrum, Wigert Mekeler, John van Lamm, Tidde Harmans
Hasling, Jans Cornelis, Cornelis Awten, Albert Geers, Hesset Budd,
Aysh Jacobs, Helmer Johnson, Lute Tunis, and hee this deponent
and Cornelis Emeson, and Herricke Clauson
and that the said Godard Brewelt hath a sixteenth part, John Gosens
a sixteenth part, John Scudinke three 32th parts, and Tidde harmans hastling
a sixteenth part and therest have every one a 32th part in the said vessell
And that shee was built at Lubeck, and was bought there by the said
owners above three yeares since, which hee knoweth because hee this deponent
paid for her with the moneys received from his said owners, who constituted him
master of her, and that shee was bought of one Jens Johnson of [?XX XXXX]
(who received the said money being  [?gXX] old Rix dollers and a Rose Noble for
a gratuitie to the said Jens Johnson.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.84v Annotate
To the third and 4th hee saith that hee this deponent was borne at [?Neremare] in the
dominion and territories of the citie of Embden, and hath lived
for theise 18 yeeres last past in the said citie of Embden, and that his
company were and are all Embdeners borne and there dwellinge, And that
his said owners have dwelt all their times in Embden aforesaid and the
territories thereof, and were and are subiects of that state referring himselfe
to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise hee cannot answer saving as aforesaid.

To the fifth hee saith his lading consisting of 58 fatts and a halfe of old [?wine]
34 peeces pf brandewine and 17 fatts of vinegar, all laden at [?CHXXXX]
by Barent van Meppen dwelling at Rochell, and sixtie fatts of new
wine laden at Saint Martins by the said van Mepppen, all which said wine
and goods were soe laden for the accompt of his said owners of Embden
and to be carried to Embden and there delivered to them and for their
accompt, but the consignement made only to the said Godard [?BorenXXX]
who therein acts for the rest of the said owners in partownershipp with him,
All which hee knoweth being master and a part owner, and receiving the said goods
aboard.

To the 6th hee saith hee signed two bills of lading for the said goods, both
of one tenour, one whereof was left in the hands of the said Barent
Van Meppen, to be sent to his said owners over land with the accompt, and
the other hee brought alonge with him with the said Barent von Meppens
letter, and that hee this deponent signed the said bills of lading at Rochell
and [?then] that brought in the shipp together with the said, this deponents [?XXXX]
from Embden, and all othee his papers and writings, were seized and came
to the hands of Captaine henry Graeme commannder of the man of warr
that tooke him, And that there were not any papers or writings torne
throwne overboard or otherwise made away or concealed that hee knoweth of
And that there were not any other bills of any other tenor signed [?XXX] [?XXXX]
[?XXX] aforesaid, And otherwise referring himselfe to the said papers seized whcih
hee beleeveth are brought into this Court hee cannot depose saving that amongst
the papers seized there were papers which were given him by Parliaments shipps, [?XXX]

To the 7th hee was at Nantes in the said shipp about a yeere since
to fetch wine and brandewine for his said owners, and was never in holland
with her, and otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the 8th hee saith hee began the said voyage from Embden in ballast and was there to
end the same, and that this deponent was to have 150 gilders for his voyage
of the said owners, halfe whereof hee received on his going out, and was to
receive the other halfe upon his retourne.

To the 9th hee saith hee had noe flagge, nor noe hollands collours aboard
at the time of the said seizure, and that hee ws taken in the bay of
Saint hellens in the Ile of Wight as hee was there comming to an anchor
after hee had lain 5 dayes at Portsmouth and a night at the [?XXXX] and paid his duties there, and
that the said Captaine [?Graeme] came aboard him in the boate
of Captane [?Wieghts] shipp one of the Parliaments shipps, but did not
showe this deponent his Commission, but tooke him aboard his shipp
in the said boate.

To the 10th hee saith hee was not freighted by Charterpartie being sent
out in the said imployment of the said owners.

[?Solomon gXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.85r Annotate
The first of November 1653.

The claime of Peter hubrecht and)
hendrick Sutfeild of hamborough for)
the Peter Cornelis yarickson master)
and the goods in the same, taken by)
Captaine dunston.)

Cornelius Yarrickson of hamborough Mariner
Master of the said vessell the the Peter aged 37 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that the said Peter hubrecht and
hendrick Sutfeild were and are the true, lawfull and sole owners of the
said shipp the Peter and lading of wooll and seacole aboard the same being
20 sacks of wooll and eleaven lasts of coales, which the said owners laded
aboard her at hamborough about three monthes since and set her out thence
by saile therewith for Ol[one] in Normandie and there to deliver the same for their
proper accompt, and that the said shipp departed therewith from hamborough
for O[one], and in her course was on the seaventh of October last old
stile off the Shingles mett with by Captaine dunstan a private man of warr
of this nation, and brought up to Rie, all which hee knoweth being master of the
said vessell and constituted master of her by the said owners, and being aboard
when shee was soe seized by the said dunstan, who tooke this deponent and
one of his company out of this deponents shipp into his man of warr, and
carried them to dover and put them there into a house where they were kept
as prisoners for the space of nine dayes without being suffered to goe out
or any body to come and speake with them; And saith at the time of
the said seizure the said Captaine seized and tooke away this deponents
writings being two seabriefes, and fowre other writings or letters and a bill of
lading for the said goods. And lastly saith that as hee hath bin credibly informed
this deponents other two men (for hee had but three besides himselfe) that were
carried to Rie in the said shipp are nowe out of her and gonne to dover,
soe that his shipp and lading as hee beleeveth are wholly kept in the
possession and are on the discretion of the said dunstan at Rie

Repeated before the three
Judges:-/

[?Cornly ?Yarecss] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 2d day of November 1653:

The clayme of the widdowe of Hance Lemmerman)
of Hamborough deceased, and of John Lemmerman)
Hans Lemmerman and Thomas Lemmerman for
their goods in the Black Cock, whereof John ffransea
[?haon] was Master) Budd ffrancklin)

jus./:-

vide Y.Y.

Jacob Wigandi of Hambrorough
Merchant aged 25. yeares or thereabouts
a Wittnes sworne and examined saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That in or about the moneth of January 1652. (new style) one
Abraham Vergensis of Dantsick in Poland, (whom this deponent hath
for theise 5 (Poss 6) yeares and upwards by Correspondencie well knowne to
be ffactor agent or correspondent to the parties producent, and for severall
yeares before, as hee hath observed by their bookes of accompts) by the order
and direction of Katharine Lemmerman the Relict of the said Hance
Lemmerman and of John, Hance and Thomas Lemmerman heires of
the said deceased, and for their accompt did take to freight
of the said John ffransen Haen (then and for some time before and
after Master of the said shipp the Black Cock) his said shipp then lying
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.85v Annotate
at or neare Dantsicke, to saile from thence to Polticher Wick about
6. Dutch miles from Dantzicke, and there to take in a ffull ladeing
of pipestaves and clapboard, and to saile with the same from
thnce to Saint Lucar in Spaine, and in her Course thitherwards to
putt into Medenblick in Holland to attend Companie from those parts
for his better securitie againste the Turkish shippe and sea Rovers, and
being there arrived to unlade the said goods at Saint Lucar aforesaid, and to
receive such lading aboard his said shipp as hee there should be ordered and
appointed by the producents in this Cause and to bring and discharge the same to and at Amsterdam
for the said producents accompt; for which Voyage the said Master was to
have three thousand seaven hundred and fiftie gilders or florens, a
thousand floryns whereof were actually received by the said Master in
Holland from Bernard [?Roysse] and Companie factors and Correspondents
of the said parties producent by their Order as by the schedule or originall acquittance now exhibited by this deponent [?XXXXX]  And to the effect aforesaid
upon or about the 22th day of January 1652. new style, a Charter partie
was duly made between the said Abraham Vergensis on the behalf of
the said producents, and the said John ffransen Haen, which hee knoweth
because he was present at the contract and agreement aforesaid, and acting
and assisting in the making thereof, and as Wittnesse thereof signed and
subscribed the same, And saith That according to the said Contract in or
about the moneths of ffebrurary or March 1652. new style, the said shipp
under the Conduct of the said John ffranson Haen sett saile and
departed from Dantzicke to the Poltischer Wick aforesaid, where by
the order of the said factor shee received her full lading of Pipestaves
and Clapboard to bee transported in the said shipp to Saint Lucars aforesaid
and there to be delivered unto John Scrother ffactor and Correspondent
to the said parties producent for their accompt; whereupon after the
receiving of, the said lading the said shipp set sayle therewith from the
Politscher Wick aforesaid, and in her Course towards Saint Lucar came
to Modenblick as aforesaid to attend Companie for the securitie of he
passage to Saint Lucar, where about the monethe of August or September
in the yeare 1652 last past shee arrived, and the said Lading was there delivered as aforesaid
Which hee knoweth, being ffactor to and for the said parties producent, and
present at Dantsicke when the said shipp sett saile from thence with
order to proceed as aforesaid. and since by letters of advise assured of the
trueth and realitie of the premisses, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 4th article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That in or
about the moneth of October in the yeare 1652: last past, and after
the delivery of the said pipestaves and clapboards to the said John
Scrother and Companie Correspondents to the said parties producent by their
order and direction, the said John Scrother and Companies laded and
putt on board or casued to be laden and putt on board the said shipp
Black Cocke then lying before Saint Lucar in Spaine One hundred
ninety and six butts of sack, six butts of [?c]ent wyne, two hundred
small barrells of olives, and seaventeene hogsheads of olives, and nine
(hundred
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.86r Annotate
hundred and ninetie dozen of Corke all well conditioned and the said butts of wine marked
with the marke in the margent

'A. S. M.' [with vertical I through S), [L.H. MARGIN]

to be transported and carried in the said
shipp from Saint Lucar aforesaid to Amsterdam: there to be delivered
to Bernardo Pas and Companie the ffactors agents and Correspondents
of the said parties producent for their proper accompt, and upon their adventure,
Which he knoweth for that hee this deponent being as aforesaid factor and
agent to and for the said parties producent, and being from Dantzicke arrived
at Hamborough in or about the moneth of November 1653. and there
frequently and familiarly conversant with the said parties producent, they a
acquainted this deponent that they had given order to the said John Srrother and
Companie their said Correspondents, to lade the said shippe with wine and other
Commodities for their accompt (in [?returne] of goods the said ffactors had received from
them) to be transported and delivered as aforesaid; And for that this deponent
being here in London about the later end of December 1652. about the said
producents occasions, they the said producents having intelligence that the said
shipp and ladeing were brought up into England, sent a letter to this deponent
advising him this deponent thereof, and gave him order to reclayme the goods
predeposed, and to that end they also sent him two originall bills of
lading, one for the goods predeposed, and the other for a quantitie of goods
in the same shipp, belonging to the said John Scrother, together with an
Attestation under the seale of Hamnorough for and concerning the propriety
of the goods predeposed, wherby this deponent is fully and absolutely assured
that the said goods before severally expressed did and doe in trueth and reality belong
unto the said producents as the true and lawfull Owners and Proprietors
thereof, and for such the said producents were and are commonly accompted
reputed and taken, And otherwise cannot depose:

To the 5th article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That the wines
olives and Corke severally before expressed were, (as hee firmely for the reasons
precedent and subsequent is assured) brought and provided by the said John
Scrother and Companie with the moneys effects or goods of the said producents
remaining in their hands, for that this deponent being at Hamborough with
the said producents about a yeare agoe was by them entrusted and employed
as being their ffactor and agent to see and peruse their bookes of accompts,
wherein and whereby he found and observed, That the said producents in the yeare 1652. last past in severall
shipps had sent from Hamborough to their said factor in Spaine, and returne thereof to be made
unto them in Wines and other Commodities, Videlicet in one fatt n:° 1, marked 'A'  10. pieces of
superior fine wire n:° 1/4. 20. peeces of the same. 12. of ring wyer n:° 1/2. 30. peeces of 4[?X]8 wyer n:° 1. 30. peeces 3/8
wire n:° 2. 30. peices of middle wire n:° 3. 30. peeces of needle wire n:° 4. 30. pieces of small wyer n:° 5. 30
pieces of Course wire n:° 6./210 peeces of sorted iron wire at 50/8 p piece, 200. locks of sewall sorte n:° 2 : 3: 4. 5. 6. 8. 10. 12 at 30S8 p peece; and in a fatt n:° 2. 100 peeces of small wire, 130 peeces of course wire,
230 pieces of wire att 33 [?X]s a piece, and severall other quantities of wire, knives, Slesia linnen,
fustian, [?bounsion] and other goods wares and merchandizes, the numbers quantities and valewe
whereof this deponent observed on the same products bookes of accompts, and to whom consigned for the
use and accompt afore mentioned, which said goods the said ffactor accordingly received, as this
deponent by letters of advise sent to the said producents after the receipt thereof, hath well observed
and with the proceeds thereof, and of the said lading of pipestaves and Clapboard the
said ffactor provided and procured the wines and other goods now Claymed [?in] the accompt
of the said producents, Which hee knoweth for the reasons predeposed, And otherwise
cannot depose

To the 6th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.86v Annotate
To the 6th and 7th articles of the said Allegation and schedules therein mentioned but
not annexed hee saith and deposeth, that as this depont hath credibly
been informed and sincerely beleeveth, the sayd John ffransen Haen at
about the time of the lading of the small quantities of goods predeisposed, signed
and firmed to three bills of Lading all of one tenor, for the said goods, one which
the said Master hath severall times affirmed to this deponent was aboard the said shipp
at the time shee was surprized and taken by the Speaker ffrigott, and came
to the hands of the seizors another being sent over land to the producents at
Hamborough this deponent, as aforessaid, received from them, and the same hee
hath since sent annexed to a Comission from this Court expressely sent
to Saint Lucars in Spaine for the examination of witnesses
concerning the trueth of the matter in question, which said bill of lading
this deponent for the reasons premissed is fullyassured to bee a true and reall
bill of lading, and no way fictitious or colourable. And otherwise referring
himselfe to his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose; saving hee beleiveth the
third originall bill of lading according to the usuall Custome is remaining
in the hands of the said factor

To the 8:th hee saith hee hath credibly heard and firmely beleeveth, That the
said shipp with her lading predeposed on board her being in her direct
Course for Amsterdam were mett withall surprized and taken by the said
shipp the Speaker ffrigatt and Captaine and Companie thereof by whom
they were brought into Dover in England.  And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9:th hee saith, That in the yeare 1652. and moneths therein
respectively conccuring, and for 5. yeares before and till this present
the arlate John Scrother and Bernardo Ras were and are the
ffactors agents and correspondents of the said producents, and for such
commonly reputed and taken, Which hee knoweth having for the like time
been booke keep and factor to the said producents, and thereby well
acquainted with the premisses. And otherwise cannot depose, saving that by [?XXX]
Producents bookes of accompts this deponent hath observed that they have for severall yeares before been [?XXX XXX]

To the 10:th hee saith, That the said Hans Lemmerman deceased was
according to common report a Native of the Citie of Hamborough and
Subject of that ffree State untill his death, and for such commonly reputed
and taken, and that for severall yeares before his death hee was a Merchant
well knowne to drive a great trade in Spaine, which trade is since his death
continued by the said producents of the deponents certaine knowledge, and the
said John Lemmerman Thomas Lemmerman and Hanse Lemmerman
were and are the naturall and lawfull Children of the said Hans Lemmerman
deceased, and for such well knowne and generally accompted at Hamborough
aforesaid, and are heires to the said deceased, And saith that the said
producents were are and ought to bee the true and lawfull Owners of
the wines and other goods predeposed now claymed in their names, Which
hee knoweth for the reasons by him predeposed.  And otherwise cannot
depose

To the 11:th hee saith that the said Katherine Lemmermans the Relict of
the said Hans Lemmerman deceased, and the said John Lemmerman
Thomas Lemmerman and Hans Lemmerman were and are all of them
(generally
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.87r Annotate
generally knowne and reputed for Natives of Hamborough, and Subiects of
that State where they have held their constant and continuall residence till
this present, Which hee knoweth being also a native of Hamborough and
Agent to the said producents And otherwise cannot depose:

To the 12th hee saith his foregoing deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories: [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first negatively:

To the second hee saith hee well knoweth the parties interrate, and saith that for
10. yeares last past of this deponents knowledge they have all of them lived in the
Grim in Hamborough: And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee saith hee
cannot depose:

To the 3. hee saith hee hath by correspondency and personally knowne the interrate
Abraham Vergensis for about 5 yeares last past, who is a High German and a
married man, and hath lived in Dansicke for all that time, and many yeares before, as
this deponent hath credibly heard, and the interrate John Scrother hee hath knowne by
correspondency for about 5. yeares who is a Hamburgher bourne and so commonly accompted
and is a Batchelour:

To the 4th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing depositions, And otherwise cannot
depose not being present at the buying of the goods interrate: saving that part of
the goods sent from Hamborough as is predeposed, were sent by Heyn [?Scoebach]
and Henry Scrother and other Hamborough shippers.:

To the 5th hee saith the said John Scrother is factor to the said producents but not
they to him.  And otherwise not being in the Voyage in question hee cannot depose.

To the 6th negatively.:

To the 7th hee saith by vertue of his oath, that for the reasons by him predeposed
this deponent is fully convinced in Conscience that the bill of lading by him predeposed
is reall and true, and so made and done as therein is expressed, wherein hee is
the more confirmed for that this deponent after hee had received the said Bill of Lading
from Hamborough as aforesaid, shewed at Medenblick in the yeare 1653 unto the said John ffransen [?Haen] who
declared unto this deponent that upon solemn oath hee was ready to attest the trueth of
the said bill of Lading, and for that this deponent by meanes of Correspondency is very
well acquainted with the usuall handwriting of the said John Scrother, wherewith
the said bill of Lading was and is filled up. And otherwise cannot depose:

To the 8th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise cannot
depose:

To the 9th hee cannot otherwise depose than as is by him predeposed./

To the 10th negatively.

To the 11th hee saith hee hath seene and pused the Copie of the letter in the said
producents Custodie, wherein they had ordered him to lade wine and olives, for
theri accompt in liew of the goods by them sent to him as is predeposed./:

To the 12th hee saith hee this deponent is a Hamburgher by birth and habitation
when hee is there, And otherwise negatively.

To the 13. negatively.

To the 14. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition to the 1. 2. and 3. articles
of the said Allegation:

To the 15. and 16th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition:

To the 17: hee saith, that there is insurance made of 600: li flemmish by Peter
[?Vinck] of 600: li fflemish by frans Sloyer, of 600: li flemmish by Jurian Scothering, and
of 800: li flemmish by Lodowick [?fraulus] all merchants and subiects of Hamburgh, and
none of them Subiects of the King of States interrate.  And otherwise cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.87v Annotate
To the 18th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition

To the 19th hee saith that hee this deposition deceived the bill of lading by
him predeposed from the producents by a ordinary packett or poast, And
otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose:

To the 20:th hee saith hee well knoweth the interrate Bernardo Ras
and Companie, who are all of them Native of High Germanie, and
live in Amsterdam, but have no share part or interest in the goods
predeposed, but were onely to have disposed of the same for the said
producents accompt, on Case they had arrived at Amsterdam, and that
upon provision usually given in ffactors in such Cases:

To the 21th hee saith hee knoweth the interrate Joachim Verpoorten rendent
at Amsterdam. And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee saith
hee cannot depose:

To the 22th hee saith, that the interrate John Scrother dooth trade in
Merchandizes for his owne accompt, And otherwise cannot depose:

To the 23th hee saith hee dooth not know neither hath hee over heard
amongst Merchants, That when Two States or Nations are at Warr
one with another, (especially the said warr not being declared and made
knowne by publique edict,) All or and Wines whatsoever consigned or,
sent by free persons to any port of either of the said
states or nations there to be discharged for the accompt of such free persons are or ever were accompted
Contrabanda goods; or justly considerable by any that seize them:  And
otherwise canot depose

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin:

Jacobi Wigandi [?Van samborg] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
Searle against Phillips)

?exd B./

4.sus [CHECK]

The 15th. day of November 1653

Examined upon the. said Libell given on the
behalfe of the said Searle.

4.

Captaine Simon Baily of Ratcliffe in
the County of Midds marriner aged 33.

To the first second and third arles of the said Libell hee saith
that touching the contents thereof hee referreth
himselfe to the Orders of the right honourable the Councill of
State and to the Registry of this Court touching the Letters
of Marque and Reprizeall arlate.  And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4.th. and 5th. articles of the said Libell hee saith and deposeth
that when the tyme lilate and after such tyme as the Letters of
Reprizuall arlate were issued forth under the great Seale of this Comm[onwealth]
the producent George Searle the Elder with his Sonne John Searle
and the arlate Captaine Isaac Phillipps with other persons concerned
in the matter now controverted did in this deponents presence and
heareing agree conclude and resolve together to
Man Equippe. and sett fourth the Shippe the Constant arlate
upon
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.88r Annotate
upon a Man of warr[e] voyage and designe by vertue of and upon
the Commission or Letter of Reprizall granted to the arlate Richard Allford
and the said Phillipps against the french King and his Subiects, And
saith that it was then agreed upon and betweene the said parties predeposed
that whatsoever shipps vessells goods or Merchandizes should bee
taken by the said shipp the Constant and whatsoever proffitts or moneys
should arrise or bee made thereby should bee shared and devided
betweene them the said George Searle the Elder John Searle, Isaack
Phillips and others there part adventurers in the said designe, alloweing to
the said Phillips and Allford one sixteenth part (as hee remembreth) of the
said proffitts to bee made for theire [?XXXXXX] and the rest to bee devided
amongst them (the thirds thereof to bee allsoe deducted for the Captaine
Master and Company then to goe out with the said ship); according to each
mans interest and prportion, But for the more particuler and certaine
parts or shares which the producent or any other in this matter concerned.) were
to have by the said Agreement hee saith hee cannot now call to remembrance
the same being made and done soe long since, and noe coppie a draughte
thereof being now shewed unto him, Whereby to bring the same unto
his memory againe. But sure and certaine hee is as hee saith that
such an agreement was made and into writing reduced and was afterwards
signed sealed and delivered by the said Phillip Searle and others the Adventurers
in the presence of this deponent and as hee remembreth of his
precontest Mr John White. And otherwise referreth himselfe
to the said Agreement or Writeing for further proofe heerein hee
referreth himselfe And further cannot depose.

To the 6. 7. 8. 8. and 10th articles of the said libell hee saith and deposeth
That within the tyme lillate hee saith that the said ship the Constant
in peruance of the said agreement made as aforesaid was sett forth
by the parties predeposed and did proceede to Sea under the Command of
the arlate William Harby as Captaine and this deponent as Master thereof
with which said ship severall ships with theire ladeing of goods and Merchandizes
were taken, as namely the Shippe the Concord alias the [?Endraigst]
laden with Sugars Sumack. and Maderas wines with which the ship were worth two thowsand
five hundred pounds sterling and upwards All which was condemned for
prize and came to the hands and possession of the said Phillips who disposed
thereof., Allsoe the Shippe called the fflower Pott with her ladeing
the vallew whereof hee cannot now call to minde which goods were allsoe as
hee beleeveth condemned and came to the Possession of the said Phillips; Allsoe the
Ship called the Saint Joseph laden with salt vinegar Prunes and other goods
of the vallew of about 900 li sterling besides the said ship. Allsoe the ship the
Dolphin laden with Rosen and other goods of the vallew of One Thousand
pounds sterling at the least. Allsoe the Ship called the Winter King
with her ladeing of Corne of the vallewe of about 600 700 li
sterling; Allsoe the Ship the Iland [XXXing] and her ladeing of
diverse
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.88v Annotate
diverse sorts of very riche goods a great parte whereof
was and is condemned as allsoe the ladeing in all the shipps predeposed.
all which came to the hands and possession of the said Phillips who sold
and deposed of the same, as allsoe all the ladeing in a hoy called the
[?Haye] whose ladeing consited in Wheat Rye Barly and Oats of the
Vallue of about 800 li. sterling. Besides many other sips and goods
which were allsoe taken by the said shipp upon the said designe which
were either sold or compounded for by and with the said Phillips, a
proportionable part of each and every of which said shipp and goods
soe taken did and doth as hee beleeveth (according to the said
agreement) belong and ought to bee paid and made good to the said producent
and the said John Searle. All which hee knoweth being Master of
and abord the said ship the Constant when shee soe tooke
the said Respective ships and goods and sawe the seizure thereof.
And otherwise Referring himselfe to his preceding deposition
and to the Registry of this Court hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the iith hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true/.

To the Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee cometh requested by the
producent George Searle the Elder to testifie the truth of his knowledge
in this cause for which doeing hee either Expecteth nor is hee
promised any thing. And otherwise answereth negatively

To the second Interrogatorie hee saith that his precontest John White
did of this deponents knowledge by the order and appoyntment of the said
producents pay and lay out severall soms of money for the
towards the setting forth and victualling of the said ship the Constant
But what particular som hee soe laid out hee saith hee cannot
declare And otherwise cannot more particulaly (saving his foregoing
deposition) depose.

To the 3d. hee referreth himselfe to his preceeding deposition And
otherwise cannot more particularly depose.

To the 4th saving his foregoing
deposition hee saith hee cannot now call to minde or depose.

To the 5th hee answereth negatively saving his foregoeing deposition
to which hee referreth.

To the 6th. hee saith that hee referreth himselfe to the charter
partie made for the said ships voyage And otherwise cannot depose
saving that the said ship was as hee remembreth but
at sea and upon the said designe by the space of about eight [?monethes]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.89r Annotate
To the 7th. hee saith that the interogated W:m ?Harlye was as hee
beleiveth the Sonne in Lawe of the producent George Searle
the Elder and was put into the Command of the sayd Ship by the
[XaXXXX] consent as hee conceaveth and beleeveth. of all parties interessed
in the said ship. and [?her] designe. And further cannot depose.

To the 8th. hee saith that hee was Master of and abord this said ship the
Constant when hee tooke all the said prizes All or most of which hee
saith were brought into the harbour at Portsmouth. And other
wise cannot depose.

To the 9th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing Depon And
to the Registry of this Court And otherwise cannot more particulerly
depose

To the 10th hee saith that hee this Examinate tooke an Exact and
pticular account of each parcell of goods taken and brought in by the said
Ship the Constant in which ship taken by [?her] by the Invoyces
and other papers w:ch hee found On board touching the same and by
[XXX] confessions and declaracons of the respective Masters of [?such]
vessells. And otherwise saveing his foregoing deposition hee saith
hee cannot depose.

To the 11th hee saith that hee hath not yet receaved his dues for
his share of prizes taken by the said ship but hath sold the same
with others of the said ships company to Mr Henry Stephens before his
decease. and hath not yet receaved thee Som for which hee soe sold the
Same but expects it of and from the Administrators of him the said Stephens.
And saith hee for his part had not any money or
Jewells or other [?plunder] out of any ship [XXX] dureing the said Voyages. Save only x: li which
hee receaved of Capt Phillips for one Anchor and Cables which was on bord
the [XXXXXX] and which by Agreement and consent did belong to this deponent. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 12th hee answereth negatively to every part thereof.

To the 13th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition And
otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctorr Clarke and Doctorr Godolphin.

Simon Bayly [HIS SIGNATURE]
----
The 22th day of November: 1653:-

The Clayme of Domingo Centurione for woolls)
In the shipp the Morning Starr. Budd. ffrancklyn)

Examined upon the said Allegation-

3.:us

Michael van Lubkin of Hamborough
Mariner Master of the said shipp the Morning
Starre aged 31. yeares of thereabouts a Wittnes
sworne and examined:-

To the first and second articles of the said Allegation hee saith and
deposeth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.89v Annotate
deposeth, That in the moneth of January 1653 new style, the sayd
Dominigo Centurione (who is commonly accompted and reputed an
Assistenta and one of the Council of the King of Spain, and the
principall factor or Agent) by John de Windt a Merchant of
Cadiz in Spaine and Correspondent to the said Centurione caused ?to
be laden and brought aboard the shipp the Morning Starr (whereof
this deponent was and is Master) then lying at Cadiz one hundred thirty and eight baggs
of Spanish wooll marked with the marke in the margent for the

'+ S M C' [MARKE, LH MARGIN]

accompt of the ffactories of his Catholique Majesty of Spaine, to bee
transported from thence to Dunqerke and there to be delivered
to the factor of Jaques Suarez Citizen of Antwerp for the
accompt aforesaid, Which this deponentt knoweth being Master of
and aboard his said shipp at the time that the said baggs of wooll
were received on board the same, and haveing before the lading thereby
contracted and agreed with the said John de Windt at Cadiz for the the
freight of the said woolls, and after the reception thereof this deponent
signed three bills of lading of one tenor and caused the same to be entred into his books.
the receipt of the same, and to whome they were consigned as aforesaid
And otherwise saving his subsequent depons hee saith hee cannot depose

To the third fourth and fifth articles and to the schedule or bill of
lading mentioned in the said 4th article hee saith and deposeth, That
shortly after the Lading of the said woolls for the accompt
aforesaid this deponent in the house of the said John de Windt of
Cadiz signed three bills of Lading all of one tenor and date with
this deponents owne handwriting, one of which bills of Lading was taken
aboard this deponents said shipp at the time of her being seized by the
English. and now is remaining in the Registry of this Court, And
saith That the said bill being now showne unto him was and is
one of the originall bills of Lading so signed and firmed by this deponent
for the aforesaid woolls and that the Contents thereof were and are true
and so had and done as therein is expressed, And saith hee beleiveth
the said bill of Lading now showne unto him to be the bill of Ladeing [?soe]
taken as aforesaid, And saith that the said woolls were truely and really
Laden aboard his said shipp for the service and supply of the accompt
of his Catholique Majesties in fflanders and so much the said John de
Windt both before and sewerall tymes after the lading of the said woolls told and
acquainted this deponent. All which hee deposeth of certaine knowledge
And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the 6th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.90r Annotate
To the 6th article hee saith, That after the Lading and receiving of the said
138. baggs of wooll aboard this deponents said shipp for the accompt predeposed
the said shipp sett saile therewith from Cadiz towards Dunquerke
and in her Course thitherwards was mett withall surprized and taken
by certaine. shipps of this Commonwealth and that the said woolls at the said
time of seizure were all on board the said shipp the Morning Starr
and came to the hands and possession of the Officers of this Commonwealth
Which hee knoweth for the reasons predeposed. And otherwise cannot
depose: :-

To the 7th hee saith, That in the moneth of January 1653. new style, and
for about 14. yeares before this deponent hath well knowne the arlate John
de Windt, who is a Merchant and Burgher of Cadiz, and is
married there, and saith That by the credible relation of the said
John de Windt and others at Cadiz this deponent: hath understood that
the arlate Domingo Centurione at the time of the Lading of the said
woolls was a Spaniard liveing at Madrid, and Councello:r to his Catholique
Majestie and his Principall ffactor or Agent for the sending of goods
wares and merchandizes from Spaine into fflanders for the supply of
his said Majesties occasions there, And saith both the persons arlate were
and are commonly accompted Subiects to the said King of Spaine.
And further cannot depose:-

To the last hee saith his foregoing deposition was and is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories:-

To the first hee saith hee was master of and aboard the said shipp the
Morning Starr at the time of her said seizure, and had in that
quality belonged to the same for about five yeares last past, And came
first aboard her at Hamborough:-

To the second hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing depostitio

To the third hee saith, That for the reasons aforesaid hee knoweth that the
said John de Windt is ffactor to the said Domingo Centurione, and that
by his order the said woolls were sent aboard the said shipp by [?Barquiners]
with direction under the said de Windts hand for the reception of the
same aboard for the accompt predeposed. And further cannot depose.

To the fourth hee saith, That the said John de Windt hath lived in the
street by the Port of Sevill in Cadiz (sic) for all the time interrate
And is accompted a fflandrian Bourne, and the said Centurione a Spaniard
And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the 5th hee saith hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and to the
bill
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.90v Annotate
bill [CHECK IF PLURAL] of lading remaining in the Registry of this Court And otherwise
cannot depose:/

To the 6:th and 7th hee saith, That the said 138. baggs of wooll were by this deponents
precontest, videlicet his Stiersman received aboard the said shipp who entred the
markes thereof into his booke together with the number aforesaid, which entries in
the said booke the same were transcribed into the booke of this deponent by his Precontest
and from whom received and to whom consigned, and saith that the said booke
of this deponents entrie of goods received did as to the quantitiem or number of baggs
and the markes of the same punctually agree, as also the name of the [?lader]
and to whom consigned, and saith the said booke was aboard his said shipp att the
time shee was seized, and that hee for the reasons predeposed well knoweth
the said woolls were laden by the order of the said John de Windt.

To the 8.th negatively:-

To the 9:th hee saith hee doeth not knowe neither doeth hee in Conscience
beleeve that any part of the goods interrate belongeth to any other person or
persons in the world, but onely to the said Domingo Centurione for and
upon the accompt of the ffactories of his Catholique Majesty aforesaid and
that his said shipp the Morning Starr at the time of her being seized
was directly bound for Dunquirke to have discharged the said woolls and
the rest of her Cargo:/

To the 10:th negatively./

To the 11:th hee saith, That the said John de Windt severall times told this
deponent at Cadiz that the interrate Domingo Centurione had given him
order to lade the woolls aforesaid for the accompt aforesaid to be transported
and delivered as is predeposed/:-

To the 12th hee saith, the said woolls were brought in barques from Sevill
to Cadiz with dispatches from thence in the name of the said Centurione
and being visited at Cadiz in the said barques by the Alcada [?Sackat] [?an]
Officer of the King of Spaine appointed thereunto, the same were by direction
of the said John de Windt laden and putt aboard this deponents shipp as aforesaid
And otherwise negatively, And further cannot depose:/

To the 13. hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 14. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition./

To the 15. hee is a Hamburgher by birth and habitation, And otherwise
negatively.

To the 16. hee saith the said shipp the Morning Starr begann her out
wards Voyage from Hamborough about three yeares since laden
with peece goods for the accompt of severall Merchants of Hamborough
And otherwise cannot depose:

To the 17. hee saith by Vertue of his oath, That all the goods of the
outwards lading were taken in at Hamborough, and none at Amsterdam
or elswhere under the States interrate, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 18. hee referreth to his foregoing deposition And otherwise cannot depose

(To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.91r Annotate
To the 19th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 20th hee saith hee this deponent delivered the bills of ladeing interrate to
the said John de Windt. And otherwise referreth himselfe to his foregoing
deposition.

To the 22th hee saith, That immediately upon the signing of the said bills of
lading (as this deponent remembreth) the said John de Windt delivered one
thereof to this deponent to be transported in his said shipp, And otherwis
remembreth not?:.

To the 22. hee saith the bill of lading interrate was in this deponents Chest
at the time of the seizure of the said shipp amongst the other bill of
lading for the said shipps Cargazon./:

Repeated before the Judges in Court:/

[XXXX XX XXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 26th day of November 1653. Uppon the
allegation given on the behalfe of Martyn Nokell
and the rest of the owners et cetera

Martyn Nokele Michael Swellingraber)
and Company owners of the Shipp the ffaith of)
Stetteyn whereof Jacob Ho[XXX?ers] is master against)
John Delabarr et cetera Suckley Smyth)

.1.

Thomas Adams of
Dartmouth in the County of
Devon gentleman aged 42 yeares or
thereabouts a witness produced
and examined Deposeth as followeth

To the 8th and 9th articles of the said allegation and to the schedule therein mentioned Hee
sayeth and deposeth That hee this deponent hath beene an Inhabitant of the
Towne of dartmouth in the County of Devon for theis twenty yeares last past
and upwards and sayeth That about december last past There was brought into the
said Port of Dartmouth A Swedish Vessell of the burthen as this deponent
conceiveth of about 200 Tonnes laden with Tarr and Deales of the growth
of that Country which Shipp was brought in by one James B[?arrblocke]
of London who after the Seizure of the said Shipp was intrusted in the
conduct and bringing in of the said shipp into the said Port uppon the
arrivall whereof ther were divers goods and tackle and furniture belonging to
the said shipp were sold by the said [?Beare]block and Company amongst which hee sayeth
That hee this deponent heareing that ther were some goods to be bought
went aboard the said shipp the ffayth lyeing then at dartmouth with an
intention to buy some thinges aboard the said shipp And this deponent [?and ?some ?XXXX] seeing a
new Cable which as hee conceiveth was never wett would have bought the same
but this deponent and the said [?Beare]blocke att the first not agreeing about
the price of the said Cable went away and came againe the next day
and expecting then to have gonne through with the said Bargaine the
said Brarrblock told this deponent. that the said Cable and a hawser was
sold for xxiiij li And saith likewise That the said [?Beare]blocke did likewise
sell a barrell of Tallowe to one St[?apalyn] of dartmouth which as the said
[?Stapelyn GUTTER]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.91v Annotate
consigned to him this deponent nor sold after the rate of iiij d per pound
and [?XXXXX] twelve barrells of [?XXXX] which one Mr Spar[?ke] of Dartmouth
bought of the said [?Bearblock] for which hee payed unto him as hee confessed to
him this deponent [?xx ss] per Barrell And sayeth That the said [?Beareblock] did
[?sCCC] unto him this deponent an anchor of the weighte of about 1000 pounds
weight for which this deponent was to pay the simme of seaven pounds And
sayeth further That one Mr Barnes of Dartmouth did buy likewise of the
said Beareblock a new foresayle for which hee this deponent was [?present]
when the said Barnes did pay for the same the summe of sixe poundes
sterling

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.92r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
28th of November 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

2

Jacob Hennekyn of Stetteyn in Pomerland Master
of the Shipp the ffaith of Stetteyn aged 50 yeares
or thereabouts a witnesse produced and examyned in this cause
Deposeth as followeth.

To the first second and third articles of the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth
That hee this deponent hath formerly beene examyned as a witnesse in a cause
depending in this court concerning the shipp the ffayth arlate and the
goods therein which shipp hee sayeth by his this deponents order and discretion
about twoe yeares [?since] was built at t Serdam in Holland and was there
bought and payd for by him this deponent for the accompt of the
arlate
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.92v Annotate
Martyn Necker whoe hath a fourth part the wydow of Nicholas [?TXXX]
whoe hath  an other fourth part in her Godfrey Snellangraber whoe hath an
other quarter of her Mathias Snellnigraber whoe hath one eight part Hance
[?Wyber] whoe hath one sixteenth part and of him this deponent whoe hath one
sixteenth part for which there was payed by him this deponent and his decree
and order the summe of 5000 Rix dollars or thereabouts and hath bene
master of the said shipp ever since shee was soe built as aforesaid
ffor all which [?busines] he saith that the persons before named hath bene and
[?yet] are commonly reputed ad knowne to be owners thereof and of the
said shipps Tackle and furniture and are all of them of this deponents
certaine knowledge Inhabitants of Stettynn arlate and Subiects of the
Queene of Sweden And further sayeth That in the moneth of December
1652 the said Shipp the ffayth in her course and voyage from Stettyn
aforesaid towards Cadiz in Spayne with her whole ladeing of [?XX]
Tarr and other things on or neare about the [?Vsting] in the English
Channell was met with all seized and taken by the arlate Captaine
Edward Nicholas and Company being imployed by the arlate John
delabarr as he this deponent hath beene since credibly informed by
whome he this deponent was deteyned prizoner but after
legall proceedings in this Court the said Shipp with her lading
by the decree of this Court were releised and restored As by the
REgistry of this Court whereunto he referreth himselfe doth and
may appeare After the decreee which restored as aforesaid the said decree under
the Seale of this Court on or about the moneth of July 1653
arlate was extracted under the Seale of this Court and thereby the
arlate John delabarr was required to give theis deponent possession 
of the said Shipp her tackle and furniture soe
restored as aforesaid but sayeth That the said Mr delabarr did
refuse to putt this deponent in possession of the said Shipp her tackle and
furniture unlesse this deponent would pay him the summe of fifty
six pounds and seaventeene shillings which he pretended to be due [?XX]
him for expences which this deponent was necessitatedto pay and did
accpordingly pay unto the said Mr dela barr whoe thereupon promised and
undertooke that the same vessell and her tackle and furniture should

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.93r Annotate
deponent and assureing him That upon the delivery therof the said Shipp
the ffaith her Tackle and furniture should be restored to him according
to the said Mr delabarr his order in pursuance and confidence whereof
he this deponent did goe [?XXXX] to darmouth where the said shipp then
Lay and did require the said shipp and her ffurniture [?XXX] the hands of the
partyes whoe were [?XXXX] by the said Mr delabarr for the delivery
thereof but sayeth that one Walter [?Jago] and Mr Hynde the said Mr delabars
agents and some others did deteyne and witholde the said shipp and refused
to deliver her or her tackle and furniture unless he this deponent would
give a receipt under the hand That he had received the said shipp and goods
in the same condition they were taken without any imbeazelment But this
Deponent understanding That there were severall good and divers [?partes]
of the said shipps tackle and furniture which were taken out of the said shipp
since her seizure predeposed did refuse to give any such discharge as is
arlate And otherwise saveing his former depositions had and made in
this Court whereunto he referreth himselfe as aforesaid he cannot
Depose saveing that he for his part did proffer to five [?XXXXXXXXXXXXXX] a receipt for the said shipp
and such goods incase he did or should receive them [?XXXX] onely
such things as did visibly appeare to be ....

[ADD DATA]

the said shipp was and is a vessell of the burthen of about three hundred
Tonnes and was worth to be imployed with her lading att the rate of 120 li per moneth
and according to that proportionatie that the owners of the said shipp were
and are damnified by the 

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.96r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
3.

Gaspar Hawke of Stepnich neere Statteyn
in Pomerland Marriner aged about five and twenty
yeares a witnesse produced and examined in this Cause
Deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.98r Annotate
S.S.

The third of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Chelston and company Imployers of the)
Prosoperous against the Liesde Arian)
Johnson master. Smith)

'John Johnson' of Gracht in Holland
Mariner late boateswaine of the said vessell
or Busse the Liesda aged 34 yeares or
thereabouts sworne in Court as in the Acts
thereof, and examined upon certaine Interrogatories
ministred on the behalfe of the said Chelston
and company saith as followeth

To the first 2 and 3 Interrogatories hee saith that william Claeson, Peter Johnson and Arian Paulsone
and others all hollanders and dwellers in the Gracht and thereabouts in holland
and subiects of the States of the united Netherland Provinces were and are owners
of the said herring busse and of the herrings aboard her at the time of
her seizure being 21 lasts and 6 tonnes or thereabouts of herrings, whereiwth
shee was sailing for Euchusen in holland there to dischardge, and sailed
out from Edam in holland about 3 monethes since, and that the said herrings were
taken somwhat to the Southward of Burckanesse.

To the fourth and fifth hee saith that there were some papers aboard which
were taken by Captaine Swaine, and that hee knoweth not of any papers
throwne over board or burned or otherwise made away. And that the said
Captaine [?Swanie] tooke the said busse and lading in her homewards course upon
the coast of holland on the high sea about a moneth since, And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

[MARKE] The marke of John Johnson [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Interrogatories.

2

Simon Johnson of the Gracht in Holland Mariner
aged 32 yeares or thereabouts, sworne alsoe as in the
acts of Court saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet

To the first second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee was
one of the company of the said busse the liesde of the Gracht at the time of her seizure
by Captaine [?Swaine] and company in the Prosperous which seizure was made
and donne about a moneth since on the hollands coast, at which time shee
had aboard 21 lasts and 6 tonns of herrings whereiwth shee was sailing for
Euchusen the place of her dischardge, and saith that Arian Poulson Peter
Johnson and William Claeson and others all hollanders and  Inhabitants in
the Gracht and therabouts in holland and subiects of the States of the
United Netherlands were and are owners of the said busse and lading of herrings
which hee knoweth being one of her company and sailing out in her from
Edam about three monethes since on a fishing voyage for herrings, on which
imployment shee was set out by her said owners.

To the fourth and last hee saith hee knoweth not of any papers whatsoever
torne, throwne over board or otherwise made away or concealed. And
otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose

symon ijansen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court with his precontest before
the three Judges.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.98v Annotate
The 5th of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The claime of hendrick Garrard and others)
of Embden for the Golden Lyon of Embden)
John Arianson master. Suckley. Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation and schedule
on the behalfe of the said claimers.

dt van Santen

John Arianson of Embden Mariner master
of the said vessell aged 34 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles oof the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
hee well knoweth the producents hendrick Garrard, John [?Budday],
Linders ffewen, derrick [?Budday] and company of Embden, and saith that
they all for theise twelve monethes last and some of them for severall
yeares last past have bin and at present are the true and lawfull owners
and propprietors of the said shipp the Golden Lyon and of her tackle and
furniture and are alsoe onwers of her lading of whale blubber and finnes, and for such commonly
accompted and reputed, which hee knoweth being master of her, and receiving
the said lading aboard for their accompt. And saith the said shipp was
built at Embden about tenn yeares since, of this deponentssight and
knowledge, and hath ever since belonged to that port, and this hee saith was
and is true publique and notorious. And further that the 16th
of Aprill last or thereabouts (old stile) the said shipp was set out
from Embden by the said owners being the Greenland company of Embden
to goe and saile to Greenland to catch whales, and retourne with the
effects of the fishing to Embden for the accompt and adventure of he
said Hendrick Garrard and company aforesaid. And that the said
shipp ariving un Greenland her company there fished and catched severall whales
and put and made up the whale blubber into severall caskes and with
the same and finnes was retourining to Embden, and in her course for
Embden was on or about the 25th of August last met with about [?ten]
leagues off the River of Embden by Captaine Brandley and others
in the service of this Commonwealth and seized and brought to Yarmouth
together with foure shallops belonging to the Golden Lyon worth thirtie
pounds sterling, and there detained the same to the greate preiudice of his
said owners, all which hee knoweth being master and then aboard her, and
that his company consisted of 30 persons besides himselfe. And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the third article and schedule annexed hee saith and deposeth that
upon the said seizure this deponent told and acquainted the said Captaine
Brandley that the said shipp and goods were belonging to Embden and [?XXX]
him his seabriefe under the seale of Embden being the schedule annexed
the contents whereof hee saith were and are true, howbeit the said Captaine
Brandley would not dismisse them, but kept and detayned them not [?XXX]
the said seabrief.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee hath bin master of the said shipp about 6 [?weekes]
(this being his first voyage) and came first aboard her at Embden.

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the said producents for theise 20 yeares
and upwards, and saith they are all Embdeners borne and there dwelling [?and]
subiects of the free state of Embden, and that the rest (besides those above
named) are hopman hendrick leerse, John Westerman, [?Goddard] [?BXXXX]
Jacob Alderson Brower, Nicholas Walters, doctor Newenburgh, [?TXXXX]
[?Regus], Mr Williams and some fewe others of that place whose names hee cannot
readily call to minde yet knoweth their persons well, and that the said owners
are all maried men, and houskeepers and Burgers of Embden, And
otherwise hee cannot depose, saving one dwells in the greate streete, another [?XXX]
delft, another in the Hewpen streete, on the [?butt] from another, another in the
dike street and the rest in other places of the towne.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.99r Annotate
To the third, and fourth hee saith that the said owners built the said shipp
saving two or three of them who bought their parts about a yeere since, and
that hee this deponent was present in Garret [?Bunnelts] house at Embden in Winter last and
sawe the said persons that then bought their parts pay for the same, and otherwise
hee remembreth not saving as aforesaid, and saving that his said owners have each
an 16th part, only hee is not sure but that two or three of them
have double or eighth parts.

To the 5th negatively, for the said shipp hath bin three voyages at Greenland
in theise three yeares last namely one voyage in each yeare.

To the 6th hee saith hee this deponent is an Embdener borne and there dwelling
And otherwise negatively.

To the 7th hee saith the said shipp went out in ballast and caskes on the said
imployment for the said owners.

To the 8th hee saith that hee hath not taken up any money upon bottomrie
and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the last hee saith that the said shipp was tending her course for Embden
when shee was seized, only the winde being contrary and night time shee
was faine to stand off to seaward, but when day came shee stood in for
Embden and was stiering for that port when shee was met and seized.

[COMPLEX MARKE] [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
2

The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the aforesaid allegation.

2

John Bollet of Embden Coxen of the said shipp the Golden
Lyon, aged 30 yeares or thereabouts. 

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that 
hee well knoweth the shipp the Golden Lyon arlate and hath the producents
hendrick Garrard John Buddey, [?Liuders] [?fference], derrick Buddey and company
of Embden, and saith they have bin and are the true and lawfull money and
proprieters of the said shipp the Golden Lyon and of her tackle and furniture
and lading of whale blubber and finnes and of such commonly arranged
and hee knoweth being one of her company, and seeing hee sett one by them
from Embden in Aprill last for Greenland on a fishing voyage for whale
catching, from whence hee was to returne with what hee tooke from 
Embden of the accompt of the said producents, who are the Greenland 
company of Embden, and saith then this said shipp haveing made an end of her
whale catching at Greenland, returned with the blubber and finner for
Embden she was to discharge, and in her course comming in August last 
off the River of Embden was met with and seized by Captaine Brandley
and others in the service of this State and with foure shallops belonging  
unto her brought to yarmouth which hee knoweth being one of her company
as aforesaid and going the said voyage in her and being aboard at the time
of the said seizure; And saith the said shipp about tenn yeares since was
of this deponents sight and knowledge built at Embden by some of her said
mariners. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third article and schedule annexed hee saith and deposeth, That upon the seizure of the said shipp 
and her ladeing, this deponents precontest the shipper John Arianson were aboard 
the said Captaine Brandley, together with this deponent and others of the said shipps 
Companie, and there the said skipper carried his sea brief into the cabbin
of Captaine Brandleys shipp, which this deponent then saw, and believeth that the
said Shipper did then declare unto the said seizors That he and his said shipp belonged
to the Port of Embden, and that the said shipp and her ladeing were free
and saith that the schedule annexed is well knowne to this deponent to be an
(Attestation
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.99v Annotate
Attestation from the Magistrates, and under the Seale of the City of
Embden, Concerning the said shipp and the Master thereof, this deponent
being a Native of Embden, and well knoweing the usuall impression of the
Seale of the said Citie And otherwise cannot depose, saving that notwith
standing the sid Seabriefe the said shipp with the shallops thereunto belonging
were and are to this present detained/

To the Crosse Interrogatories./ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, hee this deponent hath made two Voyages
with the said shipp from Embden to Greeeneland, and came first aboard
her at Embden about two yeares and a halfe since:/

To the second hee saith, hee hath well knowne the said producents for about
17 last yeares last past, which hee saith are all of them Embdeners borne, as
hee beleeveth, and are Inhabitants there, and Subjects to the ffree State of
Embden, And saith that Toder Reyns, Hopman Hendrick Luers, Elias
Duif, one Westermaen, and others whose persons hee well knoweth, but
remembreth not their names, are all Burghers and inhabitants of Embden
aforesaid, and all married men (save onely the said Westermaen) and saith
one of them liveth in the Pelster street, another on the Delft, another
the Mulestreet, and others in other parts of the said Citie And further
hee cannot depose/

To the third and 4th hee saith, That part of the said Owners caused the said shipp the
Goulden Lion to be built at Embden about ten yeares since, and that some others
bought their parts thereof a yeare since, And further cannot
depose, saving his foregoeing deposition to which hee referreth/

To the fifth negatively, saying the said shipp in three yeares last hath
performed three Voyages to Greeneland, on the first and last whereof this
deponent went in her thither from Embden:-/

To the 6th hee saith, hee this deponent is a Native and Inhabitant of Embden
And otherwise negatively:-/

To the 7th hee saith, the said shipp upon her last outwards voyage went from
Embden onely with her ballast, and vessells to receive the whale blubber

To the eight hee cannot depose:/

Top the 9th hee saith the said shipp at the time of seizure was directly
bound for the Port of Embden, and no other place whatsoever:-/

[?JoXX ?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

3.us

Herman Geerts of Embden Mariner aged
22. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnesse sworne and
Examined saith and deposeth as followeth, videlicet.

To the first and second articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth That
hee this deponent well knoweth the producents Hendrick Garrard [?Burg ?XXXX]
of Embden John Buddey Luders ff[?ewen], dirrick Buddey and Companie
(all
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.100r Annotate
all Merchants inhabiteing in Embden, And saith they have bin and are the
true and lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the shipp the Golden Lyon
arlate, and of her Tackle apparrell and furniture, and of her present
lading of whale blubber and finnes, and for such were and are commonly
accompted and taken, The premisses hee deposeth, being Cooper of and abord
the said shipp, and seeing that shee was equipped fitted and furnished out to
sea by the said Owners in the moneth of Aprill last upon a Voyage to
Greeneland to Catch Whales. from whence shee was to make her
Returne to Embden with such goods as shee there should receive or take for
the accompt of the said Owners who are the Greenland Companie residing
at Embden, And saith, That after the said shipp the Golden Lyon had
ended her fishing at Greeneland, being upon her returne towards Embden
shee was mett withall surprized and taken by some of the shipps of
this Commonwealth, shee being at the time of her said seizure about 10L
leagues from the River of Embden, and having foure shallops belonging to
her which then also were taken with her, and the said shipp and lading are
now remaining at Yarmouth, Which hee knoweth being as aforesaid one
of the said shipps Companie and aboard her at the time shee was seized,
And knoweing of the building thereof at Embden about ten yeares since
by some of her said Owners And otherwise hee cannot depose:-

To the third article of the said Allegation and schedule thereunto annexed hee
saith, hee well knoweth the said schedule to be a Sea passe granted by the
Magistrates of Embden, under the seale of the said Citie (whose
impression this deponent well knoweth) unto his precontest the Master of
the said shipp for her safe Conduct, And beleeveth, That the said Master
immediately after the seizure, carried the said sea briefe with him aboard
the said shipp of Captaine Brandley who made the said seizure, And by
the same and otherwise declared unto him, that his said shipp and ladeing
were belonging unto Embdeners notwithstanding all which, the said shipp the
Golden Lyon with her said lading were sent up to Yarmouth where
now they are. And further he cannot depose:-/

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true:-/

To the Crosse Interrogatories:- [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee was one of the said shipps Companie and aboard her
when shee was taken, and had performed this voyage in her, and another
Voyage about 2. yeares since, and had occasion aboard her at Embden And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne part of the said Owners ever since the said
shipp was built, And severall others of the said Owners, hee saith hee well
knoweth, namely Jacob Alders, Hendrick [?Luers], John Wesserman,
Nicholas Wolters, Elias [?d'uif] and [?Toder] Reynes [?Godders] [?Burvall]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.100v Annotate
all which hee saith are Merchants and inhabitants of Emdden, and
Subiects of that State, and saith they are all married (except the said
Westerman, and live in severall streets within the said City of Embden
And further hee cannot depose:/

To the third and 4.th hee saith, the said shipp ws built by severall of the
said Owners about 10. years since at Embden, and some of them bought
their parts about a yeare since, as this deponent hath Credibly heard, but
saith hee was not present at the payment of any moneys for the same,  And
otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 5.th negatively, saying the said shipp for all the time of this deponents
knowledge thereof hath Constantly belonged to the Port of Embden, and that
shee came last from Greeneland directly bound for Embden:-/

To the 6:th hee is an Embdener by birth and habitation. And otherwise
negatively:-

To the 7:th hee saith the said shipp went from Embden upon her last
outwards voyage onely in her ballast and Casks filled with water
being for the ffishing Voyage:-/

To the 8:th hee cannot depose:-/

To the 9:th hee saith the said shipp at the time of her seizure was directly
bound for Embden, and makeing towards the mouth of the River of
Ems, to have sailed to the City:-/

[?GXXX] [?GrXXXXss] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontests before Doctor)
Clarke and Doctor Godolphin:-):-
----
The 5th day of October 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Lewis du Bois and Abraham)
Vande Luffell for the shipp the Saint Mary of)
Hamborough (Segar Splinter Master) the tackle)
apparrell furniture and lading of the same)
Budd. ffrancklin)

Examined upon an Allegation on the
behalfe of the said Claymers./

ffrancklin. Novell dt

Segar Splinter of Hamborough
Mariner Master of the said shipp the
Saint Mary aged 30. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet:-

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and
deposeth, That the arlate Lewis du bois and Abraham van de
Luffell for seaven yeares last past of this deponents certaine knowledge
of and acquaintance with them have beene, and at present are
Citizens and Inhabitants of Hamborough, and Subjects of the ffree
State of the same, and for such were and are commonly accompted
reputed and knowne, And saith That in or about the moneth of
August 1652. last past, this deponent by the particular order and direction
(of the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.101r Annotate
of the said parties producent went from Hamborough to Amsterdam
in Holland to buy a shipp for the said producents, and being arrived
there hee had intelligence that the shipp the Mary now in question lay
at Rotterdam, and was to be sould, whereupon this deponent went thither to
see the said shipp, and having there seen, and findeing the same to be
a Convenient shipp for the use of the said producents hee returned to
Amsterdam, and there treated with the arlate Evert Garrets Moutmaker
and Wynant Theemenson the then owner of the said shipp and her appurtenances
concerning the buying of the same for the said producents, And in or about the
moneth of September, 1652 this deponent agreed with the said then owner for the
said shipp her tackle and furniture, for the summe of fower Thousand eight
hundred gilders hollands money, and accordingly the said Evert Garrets Moutmaker
and Wynant Theemenson sold the said shipp her tackle and furniture to
this deponent for the use of the said producents for the summe aforementoned,
Which summe, the said producents by bill of Exchange caused to be paid at
Amsterdam to the said Evert Garrett Moutmaker and Wynant Theemenson 
by one Abraham Englis their said producents ffactor or Correspondent at Amsterdam,
videlicet 1500. gilders shortly after the bargaine made, and 3300. gilders at such time as
the said with her full tackle apparrell and furniture fitting for a Voyage
to sea was delivered into the actuall possession of this deponent at Rotterdam
aforesaid, The premisses he deposeth being as aforesaid a Burger of Hamborough
and particularly employed by the producents in and about the premisses, And
otherwise saving his following Depositions hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the 4th and 5th articles of the said Allegation he saith and deposeth. That
in or about the monethe of October or November 1652 this deponent by order of the said
producents took possession of the said shipp then by order of the producents called by the name of the Saint
Mary, at Rotterdam aforesaid, and at Master thereof sailed with and brought
the same into the River of the Elbe about a Dutch mile below Hamborough, into
the usual place where the Hamborough shipps doe ride, and there this deponent
delivered the said shipp unto the said producents who made this deponent Master
thereof, And saith That ever since the buying of the said shipp the Saint Mary
aforesaid, the said Lewis Du Bois and Abraham van Luffell were and are the
true and lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the said shipp her tackle and
furniture, and for such the said producents were and are commonly reputed and
knowne. The premisses hee well knoweth for the reasons predeposed. And otherwise
deposeth not.

To the 6th article of the said allegation he saith and deposeth that in or 
about the moneth of ffebruary 1653. new style the said producents did lade
and putt on board the said shipp the Saint Mary then lyeing in the said River of 
Elbe nere Hamborow the goods and Merchandizes hereafter mentioned videlicet
the said Abraham van Luffell at or about the time aforesaid Laded aboard the said 
shipp
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.101v Annotate
shipp (wherof this deponent then was and now is Master) two Cases of
divers stuffes in the same severally marked with the marke in the margent
for his the said Abraham van Luffell his proper accompt and Adventure
And the said Abraham van Luffell and Lewis du Bois at or about the
the time aforesaid caused to be laden and putt on board the said shipp eight horses
and three hundred bundles of pipestaves for the joynt accompt and adventure
of the said producents, to be transported in the said shipp the Saint Mary of
Hamborough to Lisbone in Portugall and there to be delivered to one
Peter Hassche and Martin Beuerbergh their Agents or Correspondents there for their respc
tive accompts. And saith That the said Abraham Luffell at the
time of the ladeing of the said two Cases of stuffes and before and till the
present was and is the true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor of the
same and for such commonly accompted and taken And the said
Abraham van Luffell and Lewis du Bois at the said time of ladeing
were and now are the true and lawfull Proprietors of the said eight
horses and three hundred bundles of pipestaves, and so commonly accompted
and reputed. The premisses hee well knoweth for the reasons predeposed
And further cannot depose:-/

To the seaventh and eighth articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
That after the lading of the said two Cases with stuffes, and the said
eight horses, and three hundred bundles of pipestaves, as aforesaid that
this deponent signed and firmed three bills of ladeing of one one and the
same tenor for the respective parcells of Merchandizes aforesaid, videlicet for each of
the two Cases three bills of ladeing, and for the said eight horse and the
pipestaves three bills of ladeing; one of which severall and respective bills
of ladeing, that is to say three bills of lading this deponent did bring with him
from Hamborough in the said shipp, which said bills of ladeing together with
othe papers and documents concerning the said shipp and her lading
remained on board the said shipp the Saint Mary, at such time as shee was
surprized and taken, And saith That the bills of ladeing allegate, and now shewne
unto this examinate were and are the three bills of ladeing brought by
this deponent in his said shipp from Hamborough, and saith that the said
bills of ladeing at or about the dates thereof were severally signed and
firmed by this deponent at Hamborough, and were and are reall and true
and so had and done as therein is expressed and contained. Which hee well
knoweth for the reasons premised, being Master of the said shipp. And further
cannot depose:/

To the 9th and 10th hee saith and deposeth, That after the ladeing of the
goods and Merchandizes predeposed, videlicet in or about the moneth of
Aprill last past this deponent sett sayle out of the River of the Elve
towards Lisbone with the said shipp and her ladeing aforesaid, and about
(twenty
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.102r Annotate
twenty Casks with water for the said horses, (which said Casks also belonged
to the said producents) and in her Course towards Lisbone aforesaid, the said shipp
and her ladeing were mett withall surprized and taken by some of the shipps
of this Commonwealth, and since brought into the River of Thames, where shee
now remaines. And saith this deponent knoweth not the ffactors arlate, but hath
been credibly informed by the said producents both by word of mouth, and letters
of advise, That the arlate Martin Beverbergh and Peter Hasse mentioned
in the said bills of Lading were and are ffactors and Agents for the said producents at
Lisbone aforesaid, and for such they were and are commonly accompted. And
otherwise, referring himselfe to the said bills of lading hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the 11th hee saith That all and singular the goods and Merchandises
predeposed were really and truely provided and laden aboard the said shipp in the
River of Elve about a dutch mile from Hamborough by and for the accompt
of the said producents severally and respectively, as is predeposed, videlicet for the said
Abraham van Luffell and Lewis du Bois Merchants of Hamborough, and
saith, That no person called by the name of Abraham Vernuffle of
Roterdam, or any other person whatsoever in Subjection to any King or State in
hostilitie with this Commonwealth had or hath any right title or interest in the 
said shipp or goods or in any part thereof. Which hee knoweth for the
reasons predeposed And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 12th and 13th hee saith and deposeth, That since the buying of the
said shipp att Rotterdam and conducting of her from thence to Hamborough as aforesaid
shee hath never beene in any part of the Dominions of the United Nether
land, And saith, That hee this deponent at the time of the lading of the
goods predeposed aboard his said shipp the Saint Mary of Hamborough, and
some moneths before did live and dwell with his wife and family at
Hamburgh aforesaid and for that time had and still hath a home and family
there, and was and is a ffree Burgher of the said City, and a Subject of the
ffree State of Hamburgh, which hee deposeth for the reasons aforesaid
And further deposeth not./

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee referreth to his forefoing depositions:/

To the second hee saith, hee hath knowne the parties interrate liveing at Hamburgh
for about 7. yeares last past, and saith they are commonly accompted Natives of
Hambourgh, the said Lewis du Bois being a married man, and the said Abram 
Van Luffell a Bachelor the first dwelling in the Nantraen street, and the
other in the groote Barker street in Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot depose

To the third hee referreth to his foregoing deposition, And otherwise cannot depose
saving this deponent had a receipt from the Merchants aforesaid that sould the said
shipp for the moneys which they received as is predeposed, which receipt this
deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.102v Annotate
depositions at his comeing to Gamborough delivered unto the sayd producents./-

To the 4th hee saith, hee did not see the moneys paid unto the said Merchants
of Amsterdam for the said shipp, and saith the said producents are respectively
Owners each of one halfe part of the said shipp. And otherwise saving his
foregoing deposition hee cannot depose./:-

To the 5th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And otherwise
negatively. And further cannot depose:/

To the 6th hee saith, the said producents were personally present when
the said 8. horses were brought aboard their saud shpp nere Hamburgh
and sent the other goods in Lighters from Hamburgh aboard the said shipp
And saith hee saw the respective goods aforementioned in the respective
houses and possession of the said producents at Hamburgh, before the
same were brought aboard./

To the 7th hee saith the said producents respectively did at severall times
acquaint this deponent that the said goods were for their respective
accompts and Risque. And further cannot depose:-

To the 8th hee saith hee is fully assured in Conscience that the goods
now Claimed doe really and solely belong to the said producents, and to
no other person or persons whatsoever:-/

To the 9th he saith hee this deponent is a Native of Beyerland in
Holland, and dwelleth at Hamburgh. And otherwise negatively:

To the 110th hee referreth to his foregoing deposition:-

To the 11th hee knoweth not of any Insurance made upon the sayd shipp or
ladeing or any part thereof. And otherwise negatively, And further
cannot depose:-/

To the 12th hee saith the predeposed Abraham Englis factor to the said
producents managed the whole businesse concerning the payment for the
said shipp, so that this deponent knoweth not, upon whom the said bill of
exchange was drawne. And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee
saith hee cannot depose.

To the 13th hee saith hee this deponent had order by word of mouth, and that the
said producents writt a letter to their said ffactor to be assistent to this
deponent for the buying of a shipp for their use, as hee accordingly did
And further cannot depose:/

To the 14th hee saith hee this deponent hath lived a yeare and some
moneths last at Hamburgh, with his wife and a family and lived before that time at Roterdam in
Holland. And saith by Vertue of his oath, that the said shipp went onely
in her ballast from Rotterdam to Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated before doctor Clarke
and doctor Godolphin:-/

[?XXXX XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.103r Annotate
The seaventh day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Otto [?Caper] John [?Caper] and)
Companie for the shipp the Queene Esther of)
Bremen, (John Harmanson Snacke Master) and)
for the goods in the same. Budd. Smith)

Examined upon an Allegation on the behalfe of the
sayd Claymers

jus./

John Harmanson of Russenaer Ziel in the
Earledome of Oldenburgh in Germanie Mariner
aged 50. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined
saith as followeth videlicet:-

To the first second third and 4th articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
that about 14 weekes since (the time hee otherwise remembreth not) hee this
deponent was hired by the said Master John Harmanson Snack, to goe with
him for Stiersman of his shipp the Queene Esther from Emben to the Port
of Wisbuy in Gotland there to take in a ladeing of Tarr, and from Wisbuy
to Conduct and bring the same to Bremen and there to discharge which voyage this deponent undertooke, and
accordingly sailed in the said shipp to Wisbuy, where the said Master tooke in a
ladeing of about 50. lasts of Tarr, after the lading Whereof the said shipp sett
sayle and departed from the said Port of Wisbuy toward Bremen aforesaid
and in her Course thitherwards about a moneth since the said shipp and her
lading were mett with surprized and taken by some of the shipps of this
Commonwealth, and brought into England, where now they are. The premisses
hee knoweth being as aforesaid Stiersman of and aboard the said shipp during
the whole voyage in question. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the last, his foregoeing deposition is true:-/

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first hee referreth to his foregoeing deposition

To the 2. hee saith hee knoweth not the parties interrate. And otherwise cannot
depose:-/

To the 3. hee saith hee saw no moneys paid for the said shipp, nor saw the delivery
thereof, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 4th negatively, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 5th hee saith, this deponent hath knowne the interrate John Harmanson
Snacke at Bremen for 20 yeares last past, and beleeveth hee hath lived there all his time:-/

To the 6th hee hath not so deposed./

To the 7th hee saith, the said Tarre was laden at Wisbuy in Gottland by the
said John Harmanson Snack, who paid for the same, as this deponent beleeveth for
that this deponent saw the said Master carry some baggs of money from aboard his
said shipp in to Wisby, on purpose, as hee then declared to pay for the said Tarr
And otherwise hee cannot depose:/

Jan [?Harmands] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.103v Annotate
THe same day/:-

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

2us.

Peter Vkies of Lines in the Land of Groningen
in the Dominion of the States Generall Mariner
aged 29. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined
asith as followeth, videlicet:/

To the first second, third and fourth articles of the said Allegation hee saith
and deposeth, That the arlate Otto Caper a Councellor of Bremen
John Caper his sonne, John Schomaker and Cordt Engelken, Hendrich [?KXXX]
and ffrans Berentson all Ctizens and inhabitants of Bremen, and Subjects
of that ffree State, have for theise three yeares last past beene and at present
are the true and lawfull Owners each of them of one eighth part of the
shipp the Queene Esther arlate and of her Tackle apparrell and furniture, and John Harrnausen Snack the
Master thereof is also Owner of 1/4. part of the same, and for all that time the
said Owners have bene in the peaceable posession of the same, and have employed her
upon severall voyages for their accompt, during which time shee hath constantly
belonged to Bremen aforesaid, and to the persons predeposed, who are commonly
accompted and reputed the true Proprietors thereof, And saith That
about 14. or 15. weekes sincem the said shipp under the Conduct of the said Master
by direction from the said Owners went from the Port of Embden upon a
Voyage to Wisbay in Gottland to take in a ladeing of tarr, and to transport the
same to Bremen there to be delivered unto the said producents And accordingly
the said Master being with the said shipp arrived at Wisbay aforesaid hee
there Caused about 50. lasts of Tarre to bee Laden and putt aboard the said shipp
for the Accompt aforesaid. After which departing with her said ladeing towards
Bremen, shee and her lading were mett withall surprized and taken by some
of the shipps of this Commonwealth and brought up into England where they now
remaine/ The premisses hee knoweth being one of the shipps Companie
and having for severall yeares last past frequented the Citie of Bremen [?is]
there growne acquainted with the said Master his shipp and the Proprietor
thereof predeposed, and being  imployed and hired about twelve moneths since
by the said Master, to goe upon a voyage with the said shipp from Bremen to
Riga in the East Sea for the service of the said Owners which hee also did, and
since hath been by the same employed upon the Voyage in question, which [?XXX]
to agreement was to terminate at Bremen aforesaid. And otherwise hee cannot
depose:-/

To the last hee saith, his foregoing deposition is true:-/

To the Crosse Interrogatories:-/

To the first hee saith, hee was belonging to and aboard the shipp interrate at the
time of her late seizure, and first saw her at Bremen about 3. yeares since
John Hannansen Snack then being Master of her, and that by the [?appointment] of(her
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.104r Annotate
her said Owners as this deponent beleeveth/ And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the second hee saith, hee hath knowne the interrate Otto Caper John Caper
and John Schoomaker, and the rest of the Owners aforesaid for about five yeares
last past, and saith hee hath Credibly heard that the said shipp by their direction
was about 3. yeares and a halfe since built at Euckhuysen in Holland, And
otherwise negatively, and further cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatorie hee saith, hee did not see any moneyes paid for the said
shipp, neither was he present at the delivery of the same, And further cannot
depose./

To the 4:th negatively for his part, And otherwise saving his foregoing depositions
hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 5:th hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate John Harmanson Snack for
about 5. or 6. yeares last past dwelling at bremen aforesaid./:-

To the 6th hee saith, hee hath not so deposed:-/

To the seaventh hee saith, hee this deponent was at Wisbuy in Gottland within the
time interrate, but saith the producents interrate were not then there, and that
the said Master of the said shipp bought the ladeing of Tarr aforesaid for the accompt
of himselfe and his said Owners and saith hee saw the said Master at Wisbuy
pay for a great part of the said Tarr, with monies which hee had transported
in his said shipp from Embden to Wisbuy. And otherwise hee cannot depose:-

the marke of
Peter [MARKE] Vlies [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before
the Judges of Admiraltie:/
----
The 7th day of October 1653:-

The Clayme of Andrew Lumicke et company for the shipp)
the ffower Brothers (whereof Peter Stinte was)
Master) and the goods in the same. Smith. Budd)

Examined upon the said Alleagtion:-

2us.

Martin Grimm of Tunning in the Dukedom of
Holsteyn Mariner aged 28. yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet:-

To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That in the
moneths of May June July and August last past 1653. the arlate
Andrew Lumicke, and Isis Matthysen, and Peter Tytens and compamy all Burghers and
Inhabitants of Tunning were and are the true and Lawful Owners and Proprietors
of the shipp the foure brothers arlate, (whereof the said Peter Stinte was lately
Master) and of her Tackle apparrell and furniture; And That the arlate
Peter Jansen Callice of ffrederickstadt was and at the present is and
ought to bee the true and lawfull Proprietor of all and singular the timber and
wood laden in the same, And for such Owners of the said shipp and her lading
respectively the parties predeposed were and are commonly accompted and reputed
The premisses hee knoweth, being a Burgher of Tunning aforesaid, and well
acquainted with the said Owners of the shipp and ladeing; and particularly knowing
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.104v Annotate
That the said Peter Jansen Callice in or about the moneths of March and
Aprill last past ffreighted from Tunning the said shipp the ffoure
brothers, upon a voyage to the Belt there to take in a ladeing of wood for the
accompt of the said Callice And so much the said Peter Stints about Whitsuntide
last comeing over land from the Belt to Tunning there acquainted this deponent, And
otherwise saving his following deposition hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the second hee saith, That the said Peter Stint then and there also acquainted
this deponent That the ladeing of wood and timber Which hee was to take in for the
said Peter Jansen Callice his accompt, consisted in eleaven great balkes
seaven peeces of Timber called knees, and oe greate peece of timber for the stemm of
a shipp; but whether hee was to transport or where to deliver the same, this
deponent knoweth not. And further cannot depose:-/

To the third hee saith, hee hath Credibly heard That the said shipp and her
ladeing are taken by the English and brought into the River of Thames And
further cannot depose:-/

To the 4:th hee saith, That the said Andrew Lunicke and Companie Owners of the
said shipp the foure Brothers were and are all of them Burghers of Tunning, and
Subjects of the Duke of Holsteyn, and for such commonly accompted reputed
and taken, and the said Peter Jansen Callice was and is a Burgher of
ffrederickstadt in Holsteyn, and a Subject also of the said Duke, and for such
Commonly accompted. And saith there is a free Commerce peace and
Amity betweene the said Duke and this Commonwealth. The premisses hee knoweth
being a Burgher of Tunning aforesaid, and well acquainted with the persons
predeposed. And further cannot depose:-

To the Crosse Interrogatories:-

To the first negatively, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the second hee saith, That hee hath knowne the said Andrew [?Lunick] and
the rest of the said Owners constantly dwelling at Tunning aforesaid for 10 yeares
last past and upwards, And otherwise cannot depose./:-

To the third hee saith hee saw no moneys paid for the said shipp, And otherwise
cannot depose, saving hee hath knowne her belonging to the Port of Tunning for
eight or nine yeares last past./

To the fourth, hee saith hee hath Credibly heard That the said Peter Jansen
Callice did buy and pay for the Tymber now Claymed, but this deponent saw
no moneys paid for the same, And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee
saith hee canot depose:-/

To the 5.th and 6th hee cannot depose:-/

[?XXXX] [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges of Admiraltie:-
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.105r Annotate
The 8th of 8ber 1653.

The claime of the Widowe and heires of George da Ettonheard)
for their moneys in the Morning Starr. Michael van Lubkin)
Master. Smith. Budd.)

Examined upon the allegation
on th ebehalfe of the said
claimers.

1

Lucas Wrede of hamborough Mariner
Stiersman of the said shipp the Morning Starr
aged 52 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
in the monethes of January last or thereabouts there were in the bay of Cadiz
laden and put aboard the shipp the Morning Starr arlate Michael van Lubkin
master to be transported to dunquirke or Ostend eight cases or chests of silver

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marked as in the margin, in the name and as for the use and accompt of
the said widowe and heires of the said George de Ettenheard, who were at the
time of the said lading and are commonly accompted the true and lawfull owners
and proprietors thereof; which hee knoweth being one of the said shipps company
and seeing the said chests or cases brought aboard on a barque from Sevill, the
master of which barque brought alonge with him a disparris or license for the
lading thereof and showed the same. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third article hee saith that upon the said lading the said Michael Van Lubkin
signed bills of lading for the said silver aboard the said shipp of this deponents
sight and knowledge, referring himselfe to the said bills, And otherwise hee
cannot depose, saving that the three bills left to be showne unto him, hee saith
were and are three of the said bills, and subscribed by the said master the time and
place aforesaid.

To the fourth hee cannot depose.

To the fifth hee saith that after the said lading of the said eight cases of silver the
said shipp departed from Cadiz for dunquirke or Ostend, and in her course thitherwards
was seized by some of the Parliaments shipps, the which time of seizure the said
silver was aboard her, which hee knoweth being aboard and seeing the said seizure
soe made, and the said shipp and silver thereupon came to the possession of the
Captaines that made the said seizure

To the 6th hee saith that the said widowe and heires were and are commonly
accompted Spaniards, Inhabitants of Madrid, subiects of the kinge of Spaine
and such as have and enioy his office of the Crusado, and doe upon occasion
furnish him with greate summes of money for his affaires of State in fflanders
and for their use and service (as the barkere said) the said eight
chests or cases were brought aboard, and laden. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 6th (sic) hee saith that in all probabilitie and as the designe and intention of
the master and company were, the said shipp should and had gonne and delivered
the said silver according to the said bills at dunquirke or Ostend in case shee had
not bin soe surprized and interupted.

To the Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee hath served in and belonged to the said shipp for theise
foure yeares last and upwards, and came first aboard her at hamburgh, and
otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the second and third hee saith, hee knoweth the said widowe and heires nor their
factor interrogated, and otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose
saving the said silver was laden in the day time, and received by the master
or in his presence.

To the fourth hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and to the said bills, and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth and 6 hee saith the master aforesaid tooke notice in writing of the
said lading, which writing hee beleeveth agreeth with the said bills, And otherwise
hee cannot answer saving as aforesaid.

To the 7th hee cannot depose saving as aaforesaid.

To the 8th negatively.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.105v Annotate
To the 9th, 10 11th and 12th negatively.

To the 13th and 14 hee saith that hee this deponent is a hamburger borne and there
dwelling, [?XXXX] [?hamburgh liveth in it] and otherwise negatively.

To the 15 and 16 negatively.

To the 17 hee cannot depose.

To the 18th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and cannot
otherwise depose.

To the 19th hee saith the said silver was laden aboard the said shipp in the
said roade under the commannd of the fortresse of cadiz, and saith
the said barkero left the said dispaccio or license, which was brought in the
said shipp and was aboard her at the time of the said seizure, And
otherwise hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 20th and 21th hee saith it is prohibited and unlawfull to export
money or plate from Spaine without license or entrie, and in case of lading
it without license, if it happens to be taken by the kings officers it is confiscate
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

[?XXXX] [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 8th of 8ber 1653.

The claime of John Stephen Spinola marchant)
of Antwerp for his moneys and plate in the)
Morning Starr. Michael van lubkin master.)

Examined upon the allegation on the behalfe
of the said Spinola.

1

Lucas Wrede of hamborough mariner Stiersman
of the said shipp the Morning Starr aged 52 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles hee saith that the producent John Stephen
Spinola was and is commonly accompted a subiect of the Kinge of Spaine
and a merchant of fflanders, driving a greate trade for silver betwixt
that countrey and Spaine. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third fourth fifth 6. and 7 articles hee saith and deposeth
that in the moneth of January last past or thereabouts in the bay of Cadiz
there were laden and put aboard the shipp the Morning Starr aforesaid
in the name and as for the accompt of the said John Stephen Spinola two

'SS' [MARKE, LH MARGIN]

barrs of silver marked as in the margin, to be thence carried in the said
shipp to dunquirke or Ostend and there to be delivered to the use of the
said Spinola who was and is commonly accompted the true and lawfull
owner thereof, which hee knoweth being one of the said shipps company
as aforesaid and seeing the lading thereof. And saith that after the said
lading the said shipp departed for Ostend or dunquirke and was in her
course surprized by some of the Parliaments shipps, and that at the
time of the said seizure the two barrs were aboard, and came to
the possession of the Captaines that made the said seizure, which hee
knoweth being then aboard her and seeing the same soe donne. And
further that the said Michael Van Lubkin upon the said lading signed
three bills of lading all of one tenor for the same aboard the said shipp in
this deponents sight and presense, and brought one of them alonge
with him in the said shipp, and had the same in her at the time
of the said seizure, And otherwise referring himselfe to the said
bill which hee saith hee hath seene in the Registrie of this Court, hee
cannot depose. saving the said shipp and lading, upon the said seizure
were brought into the River of Thames.

To the 8th hee saith hee beleeveth that in case the said seizure had not
happened the said shipp had arrived in safetie at dunquirke or Ostend
and there delivered the said silver, according to the said bill for thither hee saith shee
was designed and sailing by her said master and company And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.106r Annotate
To the tenth and schedule annexed hee saith that the said schdule is one of the
said bills soe signed, which hee knoweth being very well acquainted with the said
masters hand. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories

To the first hee saith he hath bin and and belonged to the said shipp for foure yeares last
and upwards and came first aboard her at hamborough, And otherwise hee referreth
himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the second and third hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and to the said
bill of lading, and otherwise hee cannot answer not knowing any other persons
interrogated.

To the fourth hee cannot depose.

To the fifth hee saith  the said silver was laden in the day time and received bu the
said master or in his presence

To the 6 7 and 8 hee saith the said master made entrie of the said silver in his
booke which hee beleeveth agreeth with the bill for soe much as is written
in the said booke And otherwise referring himselfe to the said bill and vooke
hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee cannot depose.

To the 10. 11. 12. 13. and 14 negatively.

To the 15th hee saith he is a native of hamburgh and ther liveth, and
otherwise negatively.

[LH MARGIN] 
[?XXXXX and]
[?XXX].

To the 16 hee cannot depose, saving as aforesaid.

To the 17 hee saith the saud shipp went from hamburgh neere three yeeres
since laden with peece goods for Cadiz which were there dischardged, and
since that shee hath gonne and traded from port to port in Spaine and the
streights till the receipt of her ;ading at Cales the time aforesaid.

To the 18 and 19 negatively.

To the 20 hee cannot depose.

To the 21 hee saith the said silver was laden under commannd of the
fortresse of Cales and with license, which license was in the said shipp
at the time of the said seizure.

To the 22 hee saith the said master having signed the said three bills delivered
two of them to the backero that brought the said silver aboard, and brought
the third alonge in the shipp. And otherwise hee cannot answer saving as
aforesaid.

To the 23 hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 24 and 25th hee saith that it is prohibited to lade and export
plate from Spaine without license and in case any be taken that is soe laden without
license it is confiscable.

[?Sskride] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and Mr Cock
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

2

John Wittigrove of Hamborough mariner Coxen of
the said shipp the Morning Starr aged 30 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles hee saith that the producent John Stephen
Spinola was and is Comonly accompted a Subiect of the Kinge of
Spaine and a Merchant of fflanders driveing a great trade for silver
betwixt that Country and Spaine and otherwise hee cannot depose/

To the third 4th 5th 6th and 7th articles hee saith and deposeth that in the moneth of
January last past or thereabouts in the Bay of Cadiz there were laden and
put on board the shipp the Morning Starr aforesayd in the name and as
for
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.107r Annotate
in Spaine and the streights till the receipt of her ladeing at Cales
the tyme aforesayd./

To the 17th and 19th negatively/

To the 20th hee cannot depose/

To the 21th hee saith the sayd silver was laden under Command of the ffortresse
of Cales and with licence, which Licence was in the sayd Shipp at the tyme
of the sayd seizure./

To the 22th hee saith the sayd Master having signed the sayd three bills
delivered two of them to the Barkero that brought the sayd silver aboard and
brought the third along in the shipp And otherwise hee cannot answere saving
as aforesayd./

To the 23th hee cannpt depose saving as aforesayd./

To the 24th and 25th hee saith that it is prohibited to lade and exporte plate from
Spaine without licence And in case any be taken that is soe laden without licence
it is confiscate./

Johan [?WXXXXXgXXXXe] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of the widdow and heyers of)
George de Etton head for their moneys in)
the Morning Starr Michaell Van Lubkin)
Master Smith Budd)

Exained upon the foresayd allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Claymers./

.2

John Wittigcove [CHECK SPELLING] of hamborough Mariner
Coxen of the sayd shipp the morning starr
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and
deposeth that in the moneth of January last or thereabouts there were in
the bay of Cadiz laden and put aboard the shipp the Morning Starr arlate
(Michaell Van Lubkin Master) to be transported to dunquirke or Ostend eight

'+HR' [LH MARGIN]

cases or chests of silver marked as in the margin in the name and as
for the use and Accompte of the sayd widdowe and heyres of the sayd George
de Ettenhead who were at the tyme of the sayd ladeing and are commonly
accompted the true and lawfull Owners and Proprietors thereof which hee
knoweth being one of the sayd shipps company and seeing the sayd chests
or cases brought aboard in a barque from Sivil the Master of which barque
brought along with him a dis[?paccie] or licence for the ladeing thereof and
shewed the same And otherwise hee cannot depose/

To the third article hee saith that upon the sayd ladeing the sayd Michaell
Van Lubkin signed bills of ladeing for the sayd silver aboard the sayd
shipp of this deponents sight and knowledge referring himselfe to the sayd
bills and otherwise hee cannot depose saving that the three bills left to be
shewne unto him hee saith were and are three of the sayd bills and subscribed
by the sayd Master the tyme and place aforesayd./

To the 4th hee cannot depose./

To the 5th hee saith that after the sayd ladeing of the sayd eight cases of
silver the sayd shipp departed from Cadiz for dunquirke or Ostend and in her
course thitherwards was seized by some of the Parliaments Shipps at which
hee
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.107v Annotate
tyme of seizure the sayd silver was aboard her which hee knoweth being
aboard and seeing the sayd seizure soe made, and the sayd Shipp and silver
thereupon come to the possession of the Captaines that made the sayd seizure/

To the 6th hee saith that the sayd widdowe and heyres were and are commonly accompted
Spaniards Inhabitants of Madrid Subiects of the Kinge of Spaine and [?XXX]
as have and enioye his Office of the Crusado and doe uppon occasion [?from]
him with great Summes of money for his affayres of State in fflanders
and for that use and service (as the barkero sayd) the sayd eight chests or
cases were brought aboard and laden And otherwise hee cannot depose/

To the 6th (sic) hee saith that  in probability and as the designe and
intention of the Master and company were the sayd shipp should
and had gone and delivered the sayd silver according to the sayd bills
at dunquirke or Ostend in case shee had not bin soe surprized and
interrupted/

To the Interrogatories/

To the first hee saith hee hath served in and belonged to the sayd
shipp for these fower yeares last and upwards and came first
aboard her at hamburgh and otherwise hee referreth himselfe to
his foregoeing deposition./

To the second and third hee saith hee knoweth the sayd widdow and heyres [?but]
not their ffactor Interrate, and otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition
hee cannot depose, saving the sayd silver was laden in the daytime
and receaved by the master or in his presence./

To the 4th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition and to the
sayd bills, and otherwise cannot depose./

To the 5th and 6th hee saith the Master aforesayd tooke notice in writing
of the sayd ladeing which writing hee beleeveth agreeth with the sayd [?bills]
and otherwise hee cannot answere saving as aforesayd./
To the 7th hee cannot depose saving as aforesayd./

To the 8th negatively./

To the 9th 10th 11th and 12th negatively/

To the 13th hee saith that hee this deponent was borne neere hamburgh
and liveth in it and otherwise negatively./

To the 14th 15th and 16 negatively

To the 17th hee cannot depose

To the 18th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition and
cannot otherwise depose./

To the 19th hee saith the sayd silver was laden on board the sayd shipp
in the sayd Roade under the Command of the ffortresse of [?Cadiz]
and saith the sayd Barkero left the sayd dispaccio or Licence, [?which]
was brought in the sayd shipp and was aboard her at the tyme
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.108r Annotate
of the sayd seizure And otherwise hee cannot depose saving as
aforesayd./

To the 20th and 21th hee saith it is prohibited and unlawfull to export
money or plate from Spaine without Licence or Entrie, and in case
of ladeing it without Licence, (if it happen to be taken by the Kings Officers)
it is confiscate and otherwise hee cannot depose./

Johem [?Wettengrave] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in both causes before Doctor Clerke and Mr Cock.
----
The tenth day of October .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of the Keepers of the Libertie of England)
by Authority of Parliament against the Shipp the)
Gideon whereof Gerdt ffulcus is master taken and)
seized by certaine shipps of the ffleet of this)
Commonwealth. Bud)

Rowe dt.

Hans Beritson of Lubeck mariner Carpenter
of the sayd shipp Gideon aged two and thirty
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the .1. Interrogatorye he saith he was and is Carpenter of the sauyd shipp and was aboard
her att the tyme of seizure and hath belonged to her five weekes and came
first aboard her att Hamburgh.

To the 2. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he cannot depose

To the .4. he saith Gerdt ffulcus is the master of the sayd shipp, and so hath bene
for about eight yeares, and tooke first Charge thereof att Lubeck as hee
hath heard, and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith the sayd shipp began her outward voyage as hhe hath heard
from Lubeck to Bergen in Norway and from thence came to Hamburgh, and
from thence was bound to Nantes in ffrance, and saith she never
was in Amsterdam or any port of the united Provinces since this deponent
belonged to her.

To the 6. 7. and 8th he saith the sayd shipp is in her ballast onely hath about
100 empty casks putt aboard her by the ffreighters att Hamburgh.

To the .9. he saith he was borne at Banborgh in Swethland and is an Inhabitant
of Lubeck and otherwise negatively.

To the 10. 11. 12. he refers himself to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 14. 15. 16. 17. he saith the shipp is in her ballast and cannot depose
otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the 18. he saith that there belonged to the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure
nyne men and 2 boyes, and are all Easterlings, and the skipper or Master
is of Lubeck, and otherwise cannot answer saving his foregoeing depositions.

To the 19. he referrs himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise cannot
depose.

To the 20. and 21. he saith there was not any colours aboard but the Lubecks onely
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 22. he saith there was onely one Master aboard the sayd shipp, and his
name is Gerds ffulcus and is a subiect of the ffree state of Lubeck.

To the 23. he saith the sayd shipp came last from Hamburgh, and saith this deponent
and shipps Company in their Course from Hamburgh saw off of the forelandt
att a good distance 2 shipps which they tooke to be private men of warr
of Holland and otherwise negatively

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.108v Annotate
To the 24th he saith there were in the Company of the Gideon att the tyme
of seizure about 19 or 20 shipps that came all from Hambrugh and
beleiveth that they were and are all Hamburghers Luceckers Bremers
and other Easterlings. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 25th. he saith that att the tyme of seizure, and before the sayd shipp the
Gideon had the Lubeck colours out, and had not any other colours out from
the tyme she came out of Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot depose
not knoweing of any Hollands shipps chased by the English that
made the seizure.

hans [?XXXXXXXson] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories.

2.

Lawrence Peterson of Barne in Norwary Mariner
one of the Companie of the sayd shipp Gideon
aged eighteene yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the 1. he saith he hath belonged to the sayd shipp from her firste
building which ws about 4 or 5. yeares agoe. and ca,e first aboard att
Lubeck and was in her att the tyme of seizure.

To the 2 and 3. he saith the Owners of the sayd shipp dwell att Lubeck and are by
name, Claes Vrinson, Cort Brandt, Jasp Harts, Harman [?Head]
Claes DroCroze, Henrick Haughle, Dirick Ravenstadt and Gord
ffalcus the master of the sayd shipp, and saith the sayd shipp was
built by the sayd Owners, which he knoweth being att Lubeck and seeing
the said shipp there built by their order, and further cannot depose.

To the .4. he saith the sayd Gerdt ffalcus hath beene master of the sayd shipp
from the first building thereof. and that the sayd Owners who built her
are still owners thereof and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith the said shipp begann her outward voyage from Lubeck
with a lading of beere and some other goods, and delivering the same
att Berghen in Norwar, att Berghen tooke in a quantity of fish
and delivered the same att Hamburgh. and there videlicet att Hamburgh
was freighted for Nantes in ffrance to returne to Hamburgh with wyne
and was foeing to Nantes in her ballast saving that she had aboard
about 100 empty casks. and otherwise negatively.

To the 6. 7. and 8. he saith the sayd shipp us in her ballast as aforesayd and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9th he saith he was borne att Bearne, and that place doth account [?for]
home. and otherwise negatively.

To he 10. 11. and 12th. he saith the sayd shipp is in her ballast as aforesayd
and otherwise saving as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 14. 15. 16. and 17. he saith he cannot depose

To the 18. he saith there belonged to the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure [?XX ?men]
anmd 2 boyes, and beleiveth that they were and are all Easterlings [?XX]
the skipper or master of the sayd shipp is as he saith a Lubecker

To the .19. he saith the sayd shipp was bound to Nantes for wyne as aforesayd and
otherwise saving as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the 20. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 21.th and 22th he saith there was noe flagg aboard saving the Lubeck flagg
but one master namely Gerdt ffalcus aforesayd. and otherwise negatively
[?XX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.109r Annotate
To the 23th negatively.

To the 24th. he saith there came in the Company of the Gideon from
Hamburgh .19. sayleof small vessells and shipps, being Hamburghers
Lubeckers, and others out of the Sound all Easterlinges. and saith that
the name of one of the Lubeckers is Henrick Calven. and another
being an Hamburgher Derrick Van Dunke. anothr Hamburgher
Hendrick Martins. the names of whose shipps or the names of the other
shipps or masters of them he knoweth not. And otherwise cannot depose.

Top the .25. he saith the Gideon from the tyme of her first departure from
Hamburgh to the tyme of her seizure and att the sayd seizure had the Lubeckes colours out onely. and saith he saw the
English frigot that seized the Gideon chase two shipps which
he tooke to be Holland shipps, and were as he hath heard some say
by conjecture private men of warr of Holland. And otherwise
cannot depose.

Repeated with his precontest before Doctor Clarke

the marke of
Lawrence [MARKE] Peterson [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The 12th of October 1653.

Chilston and company against the)
great Christopher Michael Cruyer)

1

Cornelius Peterson of Stettin in Sweden Sailer
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts sworne in Court and
examined upon certaine Interrogatories ministred on the
behalfe of the said Chilston and company, saith
and deposeth as followeth.

[ADD DATA]


HCA 13/68 f.110r Annotate
The 12th of October 1653.

Thomas Christian and company against the)
greate Christofer)

Examined upon the fores said allegation.

3.

William Mowat of London Mariner Lieutenant
of the Prosperous Galliot Richard Swann Captaine
aged 25 yeares or thereabouts, sworne and examined

To the first 2 and 3 articles of the said allegation hee saith that immediately after such time
as the said Swaine had taken and surprized the shipp the greate Christofer
arlate and her lading, hee put this deponent and three other of his men into
her, and tooke some of the Christofers company out, leaving still foure
seamen of her company and two merchants in her, and sent this deponent to bring her
away for England, and about two dayes after, their being a greate storme
and they parted from their man of warr, two hollands men of warr
comming neere them, one of the said merchants being a dutchman, much
reioyced at the said approach of the dutch man of warr, and thanked God
therefore, and spealing to this deponent told him saying, well Lieutenant you
English rogue, nowe you sea what is become of you, nowe I will keepe thee
in prison with water and bread as longe as I live and am worth a stiver
or to the very same effect in the dutch language which this deponent very well
understandeth, and threatened that hee would keepe the rest of this deponents
said company alsoe in prison, and further told this deponent in dutch
to this effect, you say you have good friends in England, nowe you shall sea
if I have noe better in Holland, and often endeavoured to raise a
mutinie against this deponent and company, holding often consultacions
with the dutch stiersman and company aboard to that purpose. And about
eight dayes after the said seizure this deponent and company [?came]
with the said shipp the greate Christofer and goods into Alborough Roade
where the fleete of this Commonwealth was then ridinge, one of the
Generalls shipps sent her longe boate aboard this deponent
wherein hee went aboard [?generall] monck and having made knowne
unto him the mutinous condition of the said merchants and company
of the Christofer, the said generall gave him three men of his
for further strengthening this deponent and companie for securing the
said prize and goods and bringing them up for this port;
And saith that after the premisses this deponent and his said company
comming with the said shipp and goods into harwich roade, the said
merchants and men that were of the Christofers company mutinied
and rose up against this deponent and company and assaulted
them and endeavoured by force to subdue them, and therein prevailed
soe farr that they after they had hurt and beaten this deponent
and his company, they by force stowed all this deponent company
saving this deponent and a pilot which hee had newly taken aboard at [?XXXtch],
and had undoubtedly mastered and carried them away, but
that this deponent and the said pilot seeing their desparate condition
soe [?beyond] themselves that they fot the upper hand, albeit that
the said dutch made themselves soe sure of carrying them away that
the said Stiersman called out to the said merchant to cutt the cable for
nowe as hee said was the time. After which premisses comming up
as farr as the [?sXXX], and it being night, the said merchant in this
deponents
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.110v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The 12th of October 1653.

Riley and company againt the Peace of
Wismar, Claes Malt master)

.j.

Claes Malt of Wismar Maariner, Master of
the said shipp the Peace or the Vreda aged
39 yeares or therabouts sworne and examined

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.111r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 13th day of October 1653:-

Examined upon the said Interrogatories:-

2us./

Jacob Hendrickson of Lubeck in Germania
Mariner Boateswaine of the said shipp the
Peace aged 28 yeares or therabouts sworne
and examined

To the first hee saith hee well knoweth the shipp the Peace interrate
whereof he was Boateswaine, and saith That one Hendrick van
Doylle a Councellor or Magistrate of Wismar well knowne to this deponent
is owner and Proprietor of the shipp the Peace interrate and of her
Tackle apparrell and furniture and for such accompted and taken as this deponent hath credibly heard
the same was built at Wismar, And saith
that Wismar is under the Crowne of Sweden. And further hee cannot depose.

(To the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.111v Annotate
To the second hee saith hee saw no moneyes parid for the said shipp And
otherwise saving his foregoing depositions hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith, the Master of the said shipp the Peace is a native
of Wismar and inhabitant there, and a Subject of the Queene of Sweden and
this deponent is a Native of Ousam in the Dukedome of Holsteyn and is
a Burgher of Lubeck and saith the rest of the said shipps Companie are Easterlings [??and of]
Lubeck or thereabouts. And further hee cannot depose:-/

To the fourth hee refereth to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise cannot
depose, saving the said Hendrick Van Doile hath lived for theise twelve
monethes last past at Wismar aforesaid, and not in Holland Zeeland
or ffrance, and is a Subject of the Queene of Sweden./

To the fifth hee saith, the said shipps ladeing consisteth of Clapboard
which was taken in at Riga in LLiefland, some of the accompt of
Merchants and other some for the accompt of the said Master and his
shipps Companie, and to be transported in the said shipp to Bourdeaux in
ffrance, where the said shipps Companie were to dispose of their severall [?parcells]
and proportions to their owne use and benefitt. And further cannot depose.

To the sixth hee saith hee knoweth not of any of the said shipps papers or
writings torne burnt throwne overboard or otherwise imbeazeled And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 7th hee saith hee hath been severall times and at severall [?dates]
at severall Ports in Holland and ffrance about 6. yeares since, And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 8th hee saith, hee this deponent was hired at Lubeck by the said
Master upon a Voyage from thence to Riga aforesaid, from whence the said
shipp was to sayle for Bourdeaux, and from thence for Hamborough
where shee was to end her Voyage, and saith hee agreed with the said
Master for 40 rixdollers for the said Voyage, 20. whereof hee received
of him at Lubeck, and 20. more hee was ro receive a Hamborough at
the end of the Voyage/ And further cannot depose./

To the 9th hee saith the said shipp the Peace was taken upon
open sea between Schagen and Norway by Captaine [?GXXX]
whose Commission this deponent saw. And otherwise negatively:-/

To the 10th hee knoweth nothing thereof:/

the marke of
Jacob 'HI' Hendricksen
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

3us./

Hans Bildfelt of Lubeck in Germany
Mariners Purser of the said shipp the Peace
alias Vrede aged 28. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet

([?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.112r Annotate
To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth, That the shipp the
Peace interrate belongeth to the Port of Wismar which is in subbjection
to the Queene of Sweden. and hath so belonged for theise two yeares last
past of this deponents knowledge, And saith that one Hendrick van Doyle
one of the Magistrates of Wismar aforesaid was and is commonly accompted
and reputed the Owner and Proprietor thereof, and that hee hath at
Lubeck and Wismar aforesaid been Credibly informed, That the said ship
was built at Wismar aforesaid. And further hee
cannot depose:-/

To the second hee saith, hee saw no moneys paid for the said shipp, And
otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose/

To the third hee saith, the Master of the said shipp is a Native and
inhabitant of Wismar, and a Subject to the Queene of Sweden, and this deponent
is a Lubecker and a Subject of that ffree State, and the rest of the Companie
are all Easterlings or thereabouts as hee beleeveth. And further deposeth not.

To the fourth hee saith the said Hendrick van Doyle hath lived at
Wismar for theise 12. monethes last past of this deponents knowledge
and is accompted a Constant inhabitant there. And otherwise hee cannot
depose:-/

To the fifth hee saith, the said shipp is laden with clapboard, which
was laden by merchants of Riga in Leifland, to be transported to
Bourdeaux in ffrance, and saith the said master and his companie had also
certaine shocks of clapboard for their owne accompt, whereof this deponent
had 8. shocks , and one shock of oares, which were to be disposed of
at Bourdeaux for their best advantage And further cannot depose/

To the 6th hee saith, That all the shipps papers on board came to the
hands of the seizors. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 7th hee saith he hath beene once at Saint Malo in ffrance about
8. yeares agoe in a shipp of Lubeck, and saith that about two yeares 
since hee was at Amsterdam with another shipp of Lubecke. And
otherwise cannot depose:/

To the 8th hee saith hee was hired upon a voyage from Lubeck to
Riga, from thence to Bourdeaux, and was to returne from thence to
Hamborough where the voyage was to end, And saith this deponent
to have the usuall hire of a Purser for such a Voyage at his
arrivall at Hamburgh from the said master And further hee cannot depose

To the 9th hee saith the said shipp was taken by Captaine Welsh upon
the open sea between Skagen and Norway, and otherwise negatively and
further cannot depose:/

To the 10th hee knoweth nothing thereof

[?SXXXX] [?BelafXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.112v Annotate
The 14th of October 1653.

[Chaston] and company against the greate Christofer)
aforesaid and goods in the same.)

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

Francis Kelmey of Horsey downe
sailer aged 21 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first, second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that immediately after Captaine [?SwXXXX] had taken and surprized the
shipp the greate Christofer and her lading..

[ADD DATA]
----
The seaventeenth of October 1553,

Jaspar ffisher of Stralesund Mariner Master of the shipp the ffifher of
Stralasund, aged thirtie eight yeares of thereabouts and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.113r Annotate
to be carried and there to be delivered for accompt of her said owners, And that in her
course therewith from Dantzike for Dunquike comming off the Texel shee was
on the seaven and twentieth of the said moneth of August met with and seized
by Captaine Lawson Admirall of the Blew Squadron for the English and by
sent up into the River of Thames, where her said lading was disposed of by
this deponent Jaspar ffisher. All which premisses touching the said proprietie
and other particulars they very well knowe, the said Jaspar ffisher having bin
Master and the said Swaine [?Bunnerson] Stiersman of the said vessell the ffishar
for theise fourteene yeeres last, and being aboard at the time of the said seizure
and bringing up tinto the River of Thames.

Caspar fisher [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
[?Signum] ['?L'] Bundurson [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The eighteenth day of October 1653

On the behalfe of Sam: Palache)
touching his Jewells seized in)
the Elias.)

3

John Chappell living within the Libertie of the Tower
of London Vintner aged five and forty yeares or
thereabouts sworne in Court before the Judges of
the High Court of Admiralty saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet.

That upon Sunday last was sennight att night being the ninth day of
this present moneth of October the sayd shipp the Elias came upp to
Limehouse in the River of Thames, and this deponent being one of
the Wayters for the Customes did that night goe aboard her and att
his comeing aboard there found one Richardson or Jackson or some such like name who had attended
the sayd shipp as wayter from Deale Castle or some place thereabouts
whom this deponent discharged according to Custome. And moreover
saith that there was amongest other pesons then likewise on board the
sayd shipp one Alderman who att that tyme had the Command of the
sayd shipp. And saith that the sayd Alderman the same night in discourse
with this deponent told him that he had gound some writings aboard
the sayd shipp in the Gunnroome oor powder roome thereof which would as he sayd
make the sayd shipp Elias a prize being one of the shipps lately
surprized by the shipp the Elizabeth one of the frigots  in the immediate
service of this Commonwealth And saith that the sayd Alderman
did then likewise acquaint this deponent that he had, or had seene
aboard the sayd shipp Elias;; a box wherein were as he sayd some
rich things, not specifying what to the best of this deponents
remembrance; And sayd that he the sayd Alderman would the next
morning carry the writings aforesayd to the Prize office, and
accordingly the next morning being Monday the 10th of October present
the sayd Alderman did take a boat and goe off towards London in
the same, and saith that he took something with him under his
Coat but what this deponent knoweth not. And saith that of this
deponents sight a young man a servant of the aforesayd Samuel
Palvache did attempte or endeavour to goe off in the sayd boat with
the sayd Alderman but the seamen aboard the Elias did not permitt
the sayd young man to goe with the sayd Alderman ashoare as he
desired and attempted to doe, but kept and deteyned him aboard the
sayd shipp Elias

John Chappell [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.113v Annotate
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING

On behalfe of the sayd Sam Palvache)

4

Thomas Marriott of Barking parish in London [?gentleman]
aged three and thirty yeares or thereabouts sworne
before the Judges of the High Court of Admiraltie
in Court saith and deposeth.

[ADD DATA]
----
The same dat. [CENTRE HEADING

On behalfe of the sayd Sam: Palvache et cetera.)

5

Andrew Mattijsen of Gottenbergh in Swethland Gunner of
the sayd shipp the Elias aged nyne and twenty yeares or
thereabouts sworne in Cort before the Judges of the High Court
of Admiraltie saith and deposeth.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.114r Annotate
T.T.

The 17th of October 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Liberty of England by)
authority of Parliament against a shipp named)
the Jonas (whereof hanse hogkins was master))
and her tackle apparrell and furniture and the goods)
wares and merchandizes aboard the same seized)
as belonging to the ffrench King or States of)
the United Provinces by certayne shipps)
in the imediate service of the Common)
wealth Budd)

Upon the allegation on the behalfe of the
Keepers of the Liberty of England./

Rowe dt.

1us

John Glover of the Cittie of London
Merchant aged 38 yeares or thereabouts
a witnesse sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth

To the first article of the sayd allegation he saith that hee beleeveth that the
Commonwealth of England hath suffered losses and damages to a very
great value by the violence and hostile actions and proceeding of the subiects
of the ffrench King and of the subiects of the States of the United Provinces
And further to this article hee cannot depose

To the second hee saith hee referreth him selfe to the order of the Councell
of State mentioned in this article, if any such be which this deponent knoweth
not and further to this article hee cannot depose

To the third article hee cannot depose./

To the 4th hee cannot depose

To the 5th hee cannot depose

To the 6th hee saith hee was on board the Shipp the Jonas arlate on the 26th
day of September 1653 as shee then lay neere Ratcliff in the River of Thames
and did then see on board her certayne great baggs of pepper upon three of
which baggs which hee sawe there stood the usuall marke of the East India Company
for the Chamber of Amsterdam in Holland and upon one other of the sayd baggs the usuall marke of
the East India Company for the Chamber of Rotterdam in Holland, and hee
this deponent the better knoweth those markes to be the markes of the sayd
Chambers for that hee hath lived in Holland and often seene the
markes of both the sayd chambers being a merchant and tradeing there for pepper
and [?XX] further to this article hee cannot depose saving hee saith it is usuall
for the Merchants of Amsterdam arlate to send out great quantities of
pepper to ffrance and other places of Christendome to vende and sell where they
conceive it will yeild best prises/

To the 7th 8th and 9th hee cannot depose

To the 10th he saith that his foregoeing depositions are true./

Suckley. Rp.

To the Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatory hee saith that hee is a merchant and hath much tradeing
for theise 12 or 14 yeares last and hath usually traded from holland to 
England with most sortes of Comodities usually traded in from thence, and alsoe
to ffrance Portugall and the East Country, and Virginia and the West Indies
in most sorts of merchandizes in those places used and much in Spicery ware
And to the rest of the contents of this Interrogatory hee answereth negatively

To the second Interrogatory hee saith that it is the usuall custome of all merchants to
trade in what comodities they conceive will yeild them most profitt and hee
beleiveth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.114v Annotate
that there is pepper and other spices to be bought and sold at Hamborough
interrate better cheape then in some Countries as Spain and Italy
and beleeveth that merchants of Hamborowe aforesaid doe send
pepper and other merchandizes from thence to other countries where
they conceive it will sell dearer, And hee saith hee hath bin formerly
better experienced in the prizes of pepper in forraine parts then was hee is
saith he beleiveth that pepper is now in Holland about 12 stivers a pound
and in England about 16 d a pound and beleeveth that in divers parts
of ffrance as at Marsellis and the parts thereabouts
pepper is of greate value then at Hamborough Interrogate And further
to the Interrogatories hee cannot depose./

To the third Interrogatorie having viewed the examinations Interrate and oath of Wilkin Wrede Interrate  hee saith and deposeth that hee knoweth
nothing of the ladeing of the baggs of pepper Interrate on board the
Jonas
And further to this Interrogatorie
hee cannot depose/

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin

Jo: Glover [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
.10.
.17.
1653
----
The 10th day of 8ber 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

dt

2

Henry Crispe of the parish of Saint Antholine in the
Cittie of London Merchant aged 45 yeares or there
abouts a witnes sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and
deposeth that it is a thing publique and taken notice of by most
men that the Commonwealth of England and the subiect sthereof have suffered
losse to a great value by the violence and hostile proceedings and
depradations of the ffrench and the dutch Nations arlate. And alsoe saith
that hee hath heard of an Order of the Counsell of State arlate to the [?XXX]
arlate and beleeveth that there is such an Oder by them made
And further to these articles hee cannot depose./

To the third hee cannot depose./

To the 4th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.115r Annotate
To the 4th hee cannot depose/

To the 5th hee cannot depose/

To the 6th hee saith and deposeth that it is a thinge usuall for the Marchants of
Amsterdam and other ports in the Jurisdiction of the States of the United Provinces
to send such quantities as is arlate and greater of pepper into ffrance Spaine and
the Streights, but saith soe farr as this deponent hath observed during the
tyme that hee hath resided at hamburgh and parts neere thereabouts useing
the trade of merchandize which hath bin about twenty yeares the Marchants
of hamburgh doe not usually send any great quantities of pepper to
any of the aforementioned places. And to the rest of the articles he cannot
depose.

To the 7th 8th and 9th articles hee saith that saving his foregoing depositions
to which hee referreth hee cannot depose/

To the last article hee saith that his foregoeing depositions are true./

To the Interrogatories./ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatorie he saith that hee is a Merchant and hath
bin soe and hath traded to and from hamborough for above these
twenty yeares in Cloath and divers other sorts of Commodities there most vendible
and the like for the pasts of holland before the present troubles in such
commodities as were there most advantagious And to the rest of the sayd
Interrogatorie hee answereth negatively./

To the second Interrogatorie hee saith that it is usuall for Merchants
to trade in such commodities as they thinke will yeild most profitt, and beleiveth
that there is pepper and other spices to be bought and sold at hamburgh better
[?choope] then in some places as namely in the upper parts of Germany
and in Bohemia hungaria and some parts of Poland for that hee hath observed
when hee lived at hamborough that the Merchants there did usually and hee
this deponent while hee there lived did usually transporte pepper and other spices from
hamburgh into some of the places aforenamed as knowing it to be dearer there then
at hamborough And further hee cannot depose for that of late hee hath not
traded in pepper, nor driven any kinde of trade to ffrance./

To the last Interrogatorie hee saith (that the examination
of the Master and company of the Jonas Interrate and of William Wrede Interrate being shewed
unto him as the Interrogatorie requireth) that hee knoweth nothing touching the
ladeing of the shipp Jonas Interrate neithwer what it was nor where laden And
further cannot depose./

Henry Crispe [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin
the day aforesayd
----
The same day./

Examined upon the sayd allegation

dt.

3

Robert Biddulph of the parish of Saint Albans Woodstreete
London
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.115v Annotate
London merchant aged 29 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith
and deposeth that it is a thing publique and notorious and taken notice of by most
men that the subiects of the Commonwealth of England
have suffered losses to a great value by the hostile proceedings and
violence and depradations of the ffrench and dutch nations And
hee this deponent hath alsoe heard and beleeveth that there is an Order of
the Counsell of State of this Common wealth to the effect arlate And
further hee cannot depose./

To the third 4th and 5th articles hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 6th 7th 8th and 9th articles hee saith hee cannot depose/

To the 10th hee saith his foregoeing depositions are true

To the Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee is a merchant and hath traded
to Hamborough for the most parte in woollen cloath for these seaven or eight yeares
last past And to the rest of the Interrogatories he answereth negatively

To the second Interrogatorie he saith hee beleeveth that merchants do
usually trade in such commoditities as they find most profitt by And
further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose for that hee hath had noe
knowledge or tradeing in that Commodity of peper./

To the last Interrogatorie (having seene and perused the
examinations and oath therein mentioned) hee saith that hee knoweth
nothing touching the ladeing of the pepper Interrogate nor hath deposed any
thing touching the same And further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose/

Robt: Biddulph [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin
the day aforesayd/
----
In the clayme of John Marquen for goods)
in the Noahs Arke et cetera)

The foresayd Richard ffaulconer upon Interrogatories

To the first second third 4th 5th and 6th Interrogatories [?Administred] in the clayme of the
sayd Bell and others for the shipp/

To the 7th Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that the Interrogate John Marquen himselfe
was not at [?Normer] Interrogated nor did himselfe lad the Tarr and deales Interrogate seized
by the sayd holland man of warr but the same were laded by one John
Killpatrick a Scot who went from Borestones in Scotland to [?Normer]
aforesayd to that purpose being imployed soe to doe by one [Purqens] of
Glascoe one of the Correspondents of the sayd Marquen, and the sayd Marquen
and the rest of his correspondents, being all of Glascoe aforesayd, And saith that
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.116r Annotate
the sayd Tarr and deales were bought of one Peter Bulgen of Norway
who receaved of this deponent sixe hundred and fifty Rixe dollers for the
same in the presence of the sayd Kilpatrick And further hee cannot depose/

To the 8th hee saith that hee was present in holland and sawe the Interrogate
John Marquen buy the barrs of Iron predeposed of, but remembreth not the name
of the man of whome the same Iron was bought, but saith hee dwelleth in a
place in Rotterdam called the Wyne haven , and that hee alsoe sawe him buy
the tarr tackle predeposed, which he bought of one John Currerrey living
alsoe in Rotterdam And saith that the sayd Currerrey told this deponent
that the sayd Marquen had signed a bill to him to receive money for the
same tackle of one Thomas Woodhead who was indebted to the sayd
Marquen And further hee cannot depose./

Richard Falconer [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated the 10th of 8ber 1653 before doctor Clarke
and doctor Godolphin
----
In the Clayme of Boll and others for the shipp the)
Noahs Arke foresayd)

The sayd Alexander Allen
upon Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee wsa in the shipp the
Noahs Arke Interrate both when shee began her voyage from Borostones
Interrate to Norway and when shee was taken and seized by the Holland Man of
warr predeposed, which man of warr then was in the Imediate service of
the States generall of the United Provinces and noe Caper or private man of warr
and saith that the Noahs Arke was seized by him in the moneth of May last
but what day of the moneth hee knoweth not certaynely but saith it was about
the twelfth day thereof And saith that the Sentence of Adiudication against the
sayd shipp the Arke was given at the Admiralty Court of Rotterdam and in the moneth of June
last but what day of that moneth or the Judges name that gave the sentence hee
knoweth not And further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose./

To the second Interrogatorie hee saith that the Noahs Arke Interrate went from Bore
stones aforesayd to Normer Interrate without any ladeing at all in her only in her Ballast/

To the third Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that Richard ffaalconer who is still Master f
the sayd Shipp the Noahs Arke came Master of her from Normer Interrate And to
the rest of the sayd Interrogatorie hee answereth negatively./

To the 4th Interrogatorie hee answereth negatively as touching being a witnesse to
any bill of sayle or to the payment of any money for redemption or buying of the
shipp Interrate And to the rest of the sayd Interrogatorie hee cannot depose videlicet hee knoweth
not the name of the partie that sold the sayd shipp nor what money was paid for her nor
of whome the same was taken up, nor of any bill of sale made for the same/

To the 5th hee saith hee knoweth of noe writings
at all on board the shipp Interrate at the tyme Interrogate and soe [?consequently]
of none that were torne burnt throwne over board hid or concealed./

To the 6th hee saith that the Shipp the Noahs Arke came from
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.116v Annotate
from the port of Rotterdam last before her seizure Interrate and
was then bound for Normer in Norway and was to returne from thence
directly to Glascoe in Scotland and there end her voyage And to the rest
of the sayd Interrogatorie hee answereth negatively./

Alexr [?Allene] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as before
----
In the clayme of the sayd John Marquen)

The foresayd Alexander Allen upon
Interrogatories

To the first second third 4th 5th and 6th Interrogatories as in the Clayme
of the sayd Bell and others for the sayd Shipp the Arke/

To the 7th Interrogatory hee saith that the Interrate John Marquen was
not at Normer nor laded the tarr and deales himselfe which were seized
by the holland man of warr Interrate but the same were laden by John
Kilpatrick a Scott servant to one John [?Purgens] of Glascoe
Merchant one of the Corespondents of the sayd Marquen sent
in the sayd Shipp from Borestones in Scotland by his sayd Master and
the sayd Marquen to that purpose but the name of the man of whome
the sayd deales and tarr was bought or what money was paid for them
hee now remembreth not and further hee cannot depose./

To the 8th Interrogatory hee saith that hee this deponent was present when the Interrate
John Marquen bought the Tarr tackle predeposed of one John Carrerry
living in Rotterdam and sawe him give him a bill of assignement to receive
money for the same of one Thomas Woodhead then liveing in Rotterdam
and indebted to the sayd Marquen which assignement the sayd Currerrey
accepted of but what the summe was hee remembreth not And further
to this Interrogatory he cannot depose saving hee saith he alsoe sawe the sayd
marquen give the like assignement to him of whome hee bought
the Iron predeposed of to receive the money due for the same (the summe
whereof hee remembreth not) part thereof of the sayd Thomas Woodhead
and parte of an other man whose name hee remembreth not which assignement
was accepted of alsoe./

Alexr Allene [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as before./
----
The 12th of 8ber 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the
Claymer./

The Clayme of the sayd Christian Marrkusson of)
Swinsound in Norway for the Hector and money and goods)
in the same Suckley Budd)

Lawrence Gooldbrandson of [?BaXXXX]
in Norway Mariner aged 28 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegation hee sauth and deposeth
that he hath well knowne that for these nyne yeares last past the
arlate Christian Markusson hath bin sole Owner and properietor of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.117r Annotate
of the sShipp the hector arlate (the arlate [?Nols] Christianson Master thereof) her tackle Apparrell and furniture
and soe comonly reputed and this he the better knoweth having lived at Swinsound
arlate these tenn yeares last and bin imployed in the sayd shipp as one of her Company for these
two yyeares last past or thereabouts, And saith that on or about the beginning of
Aprill last the sayd Christian Markusson did for his owne Accompt and adventure
lade on board the sayd shipp the hector her ladeing of deales arlate and set
her forth therewith consigned to the Port of hull arlate to be there
delivered to certaine Marchants there whose names this deponent knoweth
not And that in her course thitherwards the sayd shipp with her sayd ladeing
of deales was mett with neere the dogger sands arlate about the 28th of
Aprill last by a dutch Caper or private man of warr and by him seized
and carried to a place upon the Coast of Holland named the Vlye and
the sayd [?Nols] Christianson Master of the sayd shipp the hector to redeeme
his sayd shipp and goods did there agree with the sayd dutch Caper for a certayne
summe of money (but what summe this deponent knoweth not) to dismisse
and free the same, and being soe dismissed the sayd [?Nols] Christianson went with
his sayd ladeing of deales then on board to harlingen in Friezland and
there sold the same the premisses hee knoweth being one of the shipps
Company and aboard all the sayd tyme And further to these articles hee
cannot depose./

To the 4th hee saith that hee this deponent being still on board
the sayd shipp the hector and one of her company alsoe well knoweth
that the sayd shipp after her returne from harlingen aforesayd was met
withall neere the Riffe arlate and there seized
by a shipp of warr belonging to the Common wealth of England
but the name thereof or of the Commander hee knoweth not And saith that
at the tyme of such her seizure this deponent knoweth that there were linnens
and peeces of stuff and wyne and silke on board the sayd shipp the hector (but what
quantities of them hee remembreth not) and hath alsoe heard that there was then
alsoe on board the sayd shipp two hundred dollers, and two hundred dollers more
in the chest of the sayd [?Nols] Christianson the Master of her, but what became
of the sayd money or goods hee cannot depose for that presently after the sayd
seizure the seizer thereof tooke the master aforesayd this deponent and the rest of the shipps company
on board his owne ffrigott and there kept them as prisoners two or three dayes
and then turned them all on shoare upon the Coast of holland And further
to this article hee cannot depose./

To the last article he saith that his foregoeing deposition is true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatory hee saith hee was one of the Company of the Hector
at the tyme of her seizure aforesayd by the dutch Caper and at the tyme of her
seizure predeposed by the English man of warr, and came first on board her at
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.117v Annotate
at Swinsound in Norway in Aprill 1652 and hath belonged to her
ever since And further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose./

To the 2. hee saith hee hath knowne the arlate Christian Marckusson for
these seaven or eight yeares last past and saith that hee
is an Inhabitant of Swinsound in Norway and there hath kept his wife and family
during this deponents knowledge of him and is a subiect of the Kinge of Denmarke
and beleeveth hee was borne his Subiect And further hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith the Hector Interrate was built at Swinsounnd
aforesaid about nine yeares since of this deponents sight and knowledge by the appointment and
direction of the Interrogated Christian Marckasson who this deponent beleeveth
defrayed the Costs of building thereof and otherwise aving his foregoing 
deposition hee cannot depose./

To the 4th Interrogatory hee saith that the shipp Interrate was built at Swinsound
about 9 yeares since by one Gerd Peterson and the sayd Christian Marckusson did cause the same
to be built and was commonly reputed the sole Owner thereof, but hee this deponent
knoweth not what hee payd for the same nor to whome nor was present at
the payement of any money for her And further saving his foregoeing depo=
sitions hee cannot depose./

To the 5th hee saith that hee knoweth not nor hath heard of any other
that contributed to the setting forth of the ship the Hector to sea the voyage
Interrogated saving the Interrogated Christian Marckusson nor hath heard or knoweth
that within the tyme Interrogated hee did sett or convey over any part thereof to
any person whatsoever And further hee cannot depose./

To the 6th hee saith that hee was onboard the Hector Interrogated at the tyme
Interrogated and that the dutch man of war Interrogated was a Caper or private
man of war and that it was not in the power of the Master and company of the
Hector to avoide being taken by the sayd Dutch man of war and further
to this Interrogatorysaving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth hee
cannot depose./

To the 7th hee saith that the shipp Hector was not condemed for prize
in any Admiralty Court of Holland that hee knoweth of, neither was
the Master and Company ever turned out of possession by him the sayd Caper but saith the sayd Christian
Marckusson as is predeposed did agree with the sayd Caper at the Vlge
aforesaid before her goeing to Harlingen aforesaid but upon what terms
or what hee paid him hee knoweth not nor hath heard and further
hee cannot depose saving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth.

To the 8th Interrogatory hee saith that the winde was North West when the hector
was seized by the dutch man of warr Interrate And saith that hee knoweth
the Riff and that it is on the Coast of Norway, and East from hull Interrate as
hee taketh it and further hee cannot depose./

To the 9th hee saith that there were about five thousand deales on board the
Hector Interrate when shee came to Harlingen aforesayd but the value
of them hee cannot depose not knoweth what they were sold for nor knoweth of
any other ladeing on board her at the tyme of her seizure by the sayd
Holland man of warr And further hee cannot depose/

To the 10th Interrogatory he saith hee knoweth not how much a hundred [?Dollers]
are
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.118r Annotate
are in sterling money And saith that the linnens stuffe wine and silke predeposed
were not carried in the hector Interrate to Harlingen aforesayd but were there
laded on board her and were as hee beleeveth the proceeds of the deales aforesayd
which were there sold, and were laded for the Accompts and by the sayd Christian
Mackusson And further hee cannot depose./

To the 11th. hee saith that the Hector Interrate when shee came from harlingen
aforesayd was bound for Swinesound in Norway and would there have
discharged her ladeing now seized if shee had not bin interrupted./

To the 12th hee saith he knoweth not what papers of writings were on board
the Hector at the tyme of her seizure Interrate nor knoweth of any torne burnt
throwne overboard or concealed nor how they were disposed of if there were
any then on board./

To the last Interrogatory hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the contents thereof./

the marke of
Laurence [MARKE] Goldbrandson. [MARKE, RH SIDE]

H. Favelloz [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and Dorctor Godolphin/
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Hugh Ryly and Company imployers of the shipp)
the Mary of London John Welch)
Captaine against
the shipp the Sharke wherof Garrett)
Johnson is master Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the part of the
sayd Hugh Ryly and Company

1us

Gerrett Johnson of delfes haven in
holland Mariner aged 22 yeares or
thereabouts a witnesse sworne and examined saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first and second Interrogatory hee saith that hee is skipper of the shipp the
Sharke and that shee was built as he hath heard at delfes haven in holland and
at the coste and charges of Marimco Tunison there dwelling and a
subiect of the States of the United Provinces who is the sole Owner
thereof, and soe hath bin from the tyme of her building as this deponent
hath heard, and hath soe bin for these tenn yeares last of this deponents
knowledge, but how hee came first by her hee knoweth not for that it is as
this deponent hath heard above twenty yeares since the sayd shipp was first
built and further to these Interrogatories hee cannot depose/

To the third hee saith that hee this deponent and all the sayd Shipps company
are hollanders and subiects of the States of the United Provinces and live
all in holland, and he this deponent liveth at delfes haven aforesayd And further
hee cannot depose/

To the 4th hee saith that saving his foregoeing deposition to the first and
second Interrogatories whereto hee referreth hee cannot depose/

To the 5th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.118v Annotate
To the 5th and 6th hee saith that the sayd shipp ladeing is onely herrings
taken by the labour of this deponent and his company fishing upon the
seas, and that the same were to be transported to Delfes haven aforesayd
and there delivered to the sayd Marimus Tunison And otherwise
answereth negatively./

To the 7th hee saith hee hath bin twice in ffrance within these 6 yeares
last once in a shipp called the Black stond hore and once in a shipp
called the Hope, but never in the shipp the Sharke now seized And
further hee cannot depose

To the 8th hee saith that hee was hyred to gooe only on a fishing
voyage for herrings and to bring them to delfes haven aforesayd
and there end his voyage and was to receive five Guilders of the
sayd Marim[?i]s Tunison for every last of herrings he tooke/

To the 9th hee saith hee had Holland colours at all on board his sayd
shipp the Sharke when shee was taken and saith shee was taken
by the Interrate Captaine Wely upon the open Sea but whether the
sayd Captaine had any Commission onboard him [CHECK] hee knoweth not
And further hee cannot depose/

To the last Interrogatorie hee answereth
negatively./

the marke of
Gerrit [MARKE] Johnson

H. Favells

Repeated before the Judge in Court./
----
The 12th day of October .1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Ryley and Company, Imployer of the shipp)
the Mary against the shipp the Saint)
Peter, whereof Christopher Peterson was)
Master Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories in the [?preparatorie] on the
behalfe of the sayd Ryley and Companie

Christopher Peterson of Hamborough
Mariner Master of the shipp the Saint Peter
aged 41 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet:/

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, hee this deponent well knoweth the said ship
being Master of her and aboard her when she was seized, and saith That in
the moneth of August last this deponent bought the said shipp
at Hamborough of one Albert Schalt a Merchant of Hambourgh
for a thousand rixdallers the first penny 
and a thousand rixdallers more this deponent paid part at
Riga and part at Straelsond in the Dominion of the Kinge of
Sweden for the equipping and fitting of the same to sea, by the [?order]
and for the accompt of Wilkin Wrede and Peter [?AXXde] of Hamborough Merchants
who  are Owners of 3/8 parts of the said shipp. Albert Schalt aforesaid
(and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.119r Annotate
who is Owner of 3/8 parts more of the said shipp, and this
deponent of the rest, and saith hee hath bin credibly informed that the
said shipp was built at Straelsund aforesaid, and not in any Port or
place in Holland or Zealand. And further hee cannot depose./

To the second Interrogatorie hee saith, hee this deponent being at Straelsond
aforesaid in or about the moneth of August last past received a letter
from the said Albert Schalt, wherein he signified to this deponent that
Wilkin Wrede aforesaid had paid unto him 1500. rixdollers for his and his partners said
3/8 parts, and that this deponents wife had paid unto him in the behalfe of
this deponent 1000. rixdollers for his 2/8 parts of the said shipp, And
otherwise referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith hee is a Native of Steenen Caspell about 4 dutch
miles from Hamburgh, and liveth at Hamburgh, And saith his said
shipps Companie were all Easterlings of Lubeck or Pomeren or thereabouts
And that hee this deponent for 13. yeares last past hath been and now is
a Burgher and Subject of the free state of Hamborough. And otherwise
hee cannot depose:-

To the fourth hee saith the Owners aforesaid have lived at Hamburgh for
all their time, this deponent excepted, who hath lived there onely 13. yeares
as aforesaid. And otherwise negatively.

To the fifth. hee saith his sayd shipps ladeing consisteth in clapwood laden
at Riga in Lieffland by Wilkin Wrede junior a Merchant living at Riga about the beginning of September last to be brought to
Bordeaux in ffrance for the accompt of the said Wilkin Wrede and Peter
Alde, and about 1200. lb weight of flax, and three tunnes of Tallow for the
accompt of this Deponent and his said shipps Companie, and seaven hundred and
twentie peeces of Clapwood for their accompt And further hee cannot
depose:-/

To the 6th hee saith, That hee this deponent signed three bills of ladeing of one tenor at
Rigat aforesaid for the Clapwood belonging to the said Merchants of Hamborough
one whereof this deponent delivered together with all his shipps writings to
Captaine Welch who seized the said shipp, and the other the bills of lading
this deponent left in the hands of the said Wilkin Wrede junior at Riga aforesaid
And otherwise negatively:-/

[#] [LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]
To the 7:th hee saithg hee hath been severall times at severakk Ports in
ffrance and Holland, but hath not bin in either of those lands for about
two yeares last past, And saith the Clapwood aforesaid was consigned to
one Corneluis Luieman at Bordeaux for the behoofe of the aforesaid Owners
thereof, but saith he Doeth not personally now, nor ever saw the said
Corneluis Luideman that hee remembreth, And otherwise cannot depose./
[?XXXXX ?XXXXX] [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES] [#]

To the 8.th Interrogatorie hee saith, That the said shipp was by the Owners ordered
to saile from Straelsond aforesaid under this deponents conduct to
Riga, and from thence to Bourdeaux, if the River there were free from the
ffrench shipps of warr, or otherwise to Rochell, and there to expect further
orders from his said Owners by whom hee was ordered to end his said Voyage
at Hamburgh, but saith hee made no agreement for wages, but expected his payment
out of the said shipps ffraight at his returne to Hamburgh And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the 9th hee saith, hee had one Hamborough Colour aboard him when
(hee
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.119v Annotate
hee was seized, and 3. other old Colours which hee found aboard the sayd
shipp at Straelsond, one being a Swedish flagg, and the other redd
flaggs, but no hollands Colours at all. And saith his said shipp the Saint
Peter was taken upon the open Seas between Skagen and Norway
by the said Captaine Welch and Companie in his shipp the Mary
And this deponent saw the said Captaine Welsh his Commission aboard
his man of warr/ And otherwise cannot depose/:-

To the 10th hee saith hee was freighted by Charterpartie made at
Hamburgh by the said Owners which Charterpartie together with the
rest of his papers hee saith hee delivered to the said Captaine Welch
shortly after the seizure. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

Cristofer Peterson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin./
----
The 13th day of October 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The sayd Abraham Smith against the sayd Langley and)
others owners of the Shipp the John and Mary (the)
sayd Langley master Clements Smith)

Examined upon the Libell in this cause/

Rp. &amp; p prim. [CHECK]

2us

Thomas Beedham of the parish of Saint Mary
Magdalen in Southwarke mariner Masters
Mate of the shipp the John and Mary aforesayd aged
36 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet/

To the first and second articles of the sayd libell hee saith and deposeth
that hee beleeveth that the arlate Mr Thorowgood and Mr Mordent and others are Owners of
the shipp the John and Mary arlate and soe have bin during all the tyme arlate
as hee beleeveth And saith that during all the tyme arlate the arlate John Langley
was master of the shipp the John and Mary arlate and soe accompted and
did goe master and merchant of the sayd shipp by the appointment of the sayd
Mr Thorowgood and Mr Mordent and the rest of the owners and imployers of the sayd shipp for a
voyage to be made from the Port of London to Ginney and thence to Barbados
and soe back to London and saith that hee beleeveth that the sayd John Langley did hyre the
Arlate Abraham Smith to goe his cheife mate in the sayd shipp the voyage
arlate and the arlate Maurice Prince to goe as servant to the sayd Smith the
sayd voyage but what wages they were to have hee knowethnot And further
to these articles hee cannot depose./

To the third 4th and 5th articles of the sayd libell hee saith that the shipp the John and
Mary arlate did goe forth upon her voyage towards Ginney upon the [?seventh]
day of January 1651 English style and arrived in Ginney about the 4th of
May following and at the Barbados about the 8th of December next after
and returned safe to London againe in the moneth of August 1653 arlate
during all which tyme the arlate Abraham Smith seved in the sayd
shipp as Masters Mate and that the arlate Maurice
Prince did serve in the sayd shipp from the sayd 7th of January 1651 as a mariner and servant to the sayd
Smith untill hee died in Ginney in the moneth of May
1652 And further saith that this deponent in the harbor of [?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.120r Annotate
in Ginney did heare the arlate Captaine Langley promise unto the
arlate Abraham Smith to allowe and give him two Negroes or the price
of them And further to those articles hee cannot depose

To the 6th and 7th articles hee saith that about the 8th of December arlate the
price of a Negro into Barbados was 1500 li of sugar or thereabouts And
further to those articles hee cannot depose

To the 8th saving his foregoeing deposition to which hee referreth hee
cannot depose./

To the 9th and 10th articles hee saith that ee referreth himselfe to the Registry
of the Court arlate And further to those articles cannot depose

To the 11th hee saith that hee beleeveth the arlate John Elliott Mr Thorowgood
and the rest of the Owners of the sayd shipp the John and Mary are Subiects of
the Commonwealth of England and subiect to the authority of the Court
arlate and further hee cannot depose/

To the 12th hee saith that saving his foregoeing depositions hee cannot
depose./

To the 13th hee saith that his foregoeing depositions are true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatory hee saith that hee well knoweth that the sayd
Abraham Smith did goe Masters first or cheife mate of the shipp the John and Mary
for the whole voyage predeposed and the sayd Maurice [?Prince] as his servant till his orderly in his [?XXX] but who hyred them or what wages they were
to have he this deponent knoweth not being not present when they were hyred

To the second hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the contents thereof and therefore
cannot depose thereto./

To the third hee refereth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition and further
cannot depose thereto./

To the 4th hee cannot depose./

To the 5th hee saith It concerneth him not to answere thereto for that
hee hath not deposed touching the noate Interrate nor knoweth anything thereof

To the 6th he saith that it is the use and custome at Sea for Masters of Shipps
when they pay any of their company wages to make deduction of such
summes as the party to receive such wages is  indebted to any of the Shipps
Company and soe hee beleeveth the shipp Interrate ought to doe and further hee cannot depose/

To the 7th hee cannot depose knowing nothing of the contents thereof

To the 8th hee saith that hee this deponent was second Mate to the Master
of the sayd shipp the John and Mary during the whole voyage predeposed of
And further to this Interrogatory hee cannot depose./

Thomas Bedham [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.120v Annotate
The 19th day of October 1653:-

The Clayme of John Temminck and John Deeckens)
Merchants of Hamburgh for the ship the ffortune)
of Hamborough (whereof Asmus Hostorp is Master))
her tackle furniture and ladeing. Smith. ffrancklin.

Examined upon an Allegation
given as in the Acts of Court on
the behalfe of the said Claymers

Asmus Hostorp of Hamborough
Mariner master of the said shipp the fortune
aged 31 yeares or thereabouts a Wittnesse
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet.

That in the moneths of August and September in this present yeare 1653 and
some time before and since and at this present the said John Temminck
and John Deeckins Merchants and Burghers of Hamborough were
and are the lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the said shipp the fortune
her tackle appparrell and furniture and for such commonly reputed and
taekn, And saith That in or about the time predeposed the Owners
aforesaid did lade and putt on board or cause to be laden and putt on
board the said shipp the fortune then lying within the City of
Hamburgh two hundred and thirteene dozen of deale boards, twelve
lasts of Tarre and eighteen fathom of wood for their owne account
and adventure to be transported in the said shipp from Hamborough
to Rochell in ffrance and there to be delivered to one Constantine
Cruypenningh their factor or agent for the accompt of the said
producents who for all the time predeposed were and stil are the true
and lawfull Owners of the same; and in returne thereof the said ffactor
was to have laden the said shipp with wynes to be carried to Hamburgh
for the said producents accompt, The premisses hee well knoweth being
Master of the said shipp the ffortune, and constituted Master of her
by the said producents at Hamborough, to whom this deponent had sold the
shipp her tackle furniture, and the Merchandizes predeposed at Hamburgh
about three moneths since for the summe of 3000. rixdollars. And this
deponent further saith, That at the place and within the time predeposed
This deponent for the accompt of himselfe and his shipps Companie laded Twelve
lasts of Tarr more aboard the said shipp to be transported as aforesaid
and there to be disposed of to their best advantage. After the lading
of all which said goods, the said shipp within the time predeposed departed
from Hamburgh towards Rochell aforesaid, and in her Course thither
wards shee and her lading  then being aboard her were mett
withall surprized and taken about 14 daies since neere unto the Isle
of Wight by one Captaine Jerrington and Companie of a private man
of warr of this Nation, to whose hand and possession by meanes of the
said seizure all the deales Tarr and woods predeposed came. All which
hee also well knoweth being Master of and aboard the said shipp at the
setting forth ladeing and seizure as aforesaid. And heee akso saith, That
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.121r Annotate
the said producents are Merchants and Burghers of Hamborough and Subjects
of that free state, and so much hee saith is there publique and notorious, but
this deponent hath onely knowne them for about 3/ monethes last past, And that
this deponent is a Lubecker and all his shipps Companie were Easterlings,
Hee also saith and deposeth. That fter the surprizall of the said shipp and
her lading this deponent and his Stiersman and Boateswaine were by the said
Harrington and Companie taken out of his said shipp the ffortune and sett
on shoare at Rye after three daies imprisonment aboard their man of warr
and from Rye this deponent with his Stiersman and Boateswaine came by
land to  Dover where by the meanes and procurement of one Captaine
Philips, (by and under whose Commission the said Harrington acteth, as this
deponent hath been credibly informed) hee this deponent and his said steersman
and  Boatswaine were examined at Dover upon  their oathes touching the
said shipp the fortune and her lading, and that the said examinations were
putt into writing by order of the Magistrates of Dover who tooke the same, all
which hee well knoweth being a sufferer and present in the premisses, And saith
hee beleiveth that the examinations so reduced into writing were and are
remaining in the hands of the Magistrates of Dover, or of him whom the said
Magistrates employed to write the same, And saith That the schedule
allegate now shewed to him this examinate beginning 'These are to Certifie'
and ending 'this 8th of October 1653. Isaac Philipps', was and is a schedule
which the said Captaine Philips delivered into this deponent at Dover for
his transport to London, and saith thi deponent was personally present at the
writing and subscribing of the same by the said Captaine Philips: And
otherwise or further this deponent saith hee cannot depose:/

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee cometh of his owne accord to testify the
trueth in this Cause, and hath no part in the said shipp, but onely 8 of the
12 lasts of tarr predeposed to be for his and his Companies accompt which
hee expecteth shall bee restored unto him according to right, and that and the
restitution of his goods cloaths and necessaries taken from him by the seizors is
the whole benefitt hee looketh for by the restitution of the said shipp and her
lading:-/

To the second hee saith the said shipp was built at Grypswoll in Pomerania
and that her now Owners live at Hamborough. And otherwise saving his
foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose

To the thid hee saith hee this deponent hath bin Master of the said shipp
for three yeares last past and upwards, at which time this deponent bought her at
Lubeck of one Thomas Kneet a Lubecker for this deponents owne accompt, and saith
hee was hired at Hamborough by the new Owners of the said shipp upon a voyage
for Rochell and so to Hamburgh, where at his returne hee was to receive from
the said Owners according to agreement 66 rix dollars and two markes Lubecks for the
whole voyage. And further hee cannot depose:-/

To the 5th negatively, And otherwise cannot depose:/

(To the 6th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.121v Annotate
To the 5th hee saith, that the Captaine of the man of warr interrogated
tooke this deponent and three others of his Companie out of his shipp the
fortune, and as this deponent remembreth hee putt 4 or 6 of his owne
men out of the man of warr aboard this deponents shipp. And saith hee
heard the said Captaine give order to his men so putt on board to bring the said
shipp to Dover, but saith the said shipp might have come to a much neerer
Port namely into the Isle of Wight. And otherwise saving his forefoing
deposition hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the 6.th hee saith hee hath heard that the said shipp the ffortune was
retaken from the seizors and that it is brought up into some Port of
ffrance. And hee knoweth not nor beleeveth that hee could recover her
if hee went thither. And otherwise hee cannot depose:-/

To the 7.th negatively to every part thereof:/

To the 8.th hee saith hee had onely one Hamburger passe and no other
papers or bills of ladeing aboard when hee was seized, which passe
hee this deponent now hath, And otherwise negatively:/

To the 9th negatively:-/

Repeated before the Judges./

the marke of
Asmus Hostorp [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The two and twentieth of October 1653.

Affidavit quoad the)
Hope de Coningsbergh)

Martin Barnheid of Coningsborgh in the Dominion of the
Duke of Brandenburgh, master of the shipp the Hope of
Coningsborough, aged eight and twentie yeares or therabouts
sworne before the right Worshipfull William Clerke and
John Godolphin doctors of lawes and Charles George Cocke
Esquire, Judges of the high Court  of the Admiraltie of
England and examined upon  a certaine Interrogatorie
ministred on the behalfe of the owners of the said vessell
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath.

That the said shipp the Hope was built at Lubeck about five yeares
since, and for a yeare and three quarters last hath belonged to the port
of Conningsborough aforesaid, and that Thomas Tailer and
Andrew Tailer english merchants, and Peter Michaell and [?Reynard]
[?Marram] and hee this deponent all of Conninsborough (saving the said
Andrew Tailer who liveth at Yorke) were and are her sole
owners, which hee knoweth being master of the said vessell, and her [?XX]
[?sole] master ever since shee was soe built, and saith the said Thomas
Tailer hath bin a part owner about fower yeares last, Andrew Tailer
fower yeares and a halfe, and the rest of Conningsborough about a [?XX]
yeare and three quarters, owners of the rest of the said shipp, which
was bought of certaine Lubeckers who built her of this deponents
knowledge, and since her said building shee hath never bein in Holland nor [?XXX] [?and]
hath traded from the East countrey solely to England, and back againe in [?XXXX]

Martin Barneld [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Richard More of London merchant aged 26 yeares or thereabouts sworne
as aforesaid saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath that hee
hath knowne the said shipp the Hope for these two yeares last and upwards
in which space shee hath made three voyages from the East country to [?XX]
London under the conduct of his precontest Master [?XXXX XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.122r Annotate
which hee knoweth having in all theise voyages bin implyed as a merchant in her
businesses here in the behalfe of her owners, by the meanes and order of the
said Thomas and Andrew tailer his correspondents, who hee saith with
others of Conningsborough were and are commonly accompted her owners, And
otherwise hee cannot depose, saving that one of the said owners of Coningsborough
named ffrederick Callow was here at London about three monethes since, and was
frequently in company of this deponent

Richard [?Moores] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 26th of October 1653/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd
Hazard and Company./

Edmond Scarburgh of Attamack
in Virginia where hee hath lived for these
twenty two yeares last past, but borne in London
aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet.

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and
deposeth that hee well knoweth that in the yeare 1652 the arlate henry
hassard and company did obteyne a Comission of Reprizall or
letters of Marque under the seale of this Court for the seizing of
such shipps and goods of the ffrench King of his Subiects and of the States of the
United Provinces and their subiects and makeing prize of them as Enimies
to the Commonwealth of England this hee knoweth haveing seene and
perused the sayd Commission under seale And alsoe knoweth that the sayd
hassard and Company did accordingly fitt and furnish the sayd shipp for the
sayd voyage which arrived in virginia arlate under the conduct and
Command of the arlate Captaine Peter Wrexall in the moneth of
december 1652 and after such the sayd Wreall his arrivall in
Virginia hee the sayd Wrezall and his shipps Company did with a small Pinnance which hee then imployed seize upon
and surprize in the River of Rappahanncock arlate a dutch vessell
(belonging to the dutch West India Company and their Associates videlicet to Peter [?Stevinson] generall for the dutch att New Amsterdam Paulus Lenderson a dutchman [?XXX] inhabiting and the ffiscall of the same place, with diverse others of the same place called the hope
alias the hopewell alias the Portugall prize, alias the New Amsterdam, being laden
with the severall Merchandizes arlate the premisses hee the better
knoweth being present on board the sayd Pinnace imployed by the sayd Captaine
wrexall in the seizure of the sayd dutch shipp and goods and seeing the same
soe seized and viewing and peruseing the papers taken on board the sayd shipp. and
by reason of his this deponents longe inhabiting in those parts well knoweing
the persons above specified. And further to these articles hee cannot depose/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.123v Annotate
The 26:th of October 1653.

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd
Claymers

The clayme of Colonell Thomas Pride and the rest)
of the victuallers of the Navie of this Commonwealth)
for beefe and porke put aboard the Sea fflower)
whereof Thomas Harris was Mr Clements)
Budd)

1.

John Snowe of Bristoll in the County of
Somerset Agent for the Victualers of the Navie of this Common
Wealth aged 35 years or thereabouts a witness
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and
deposeth that hee this deponent hath bin imployed by the arlate Colonell Thomas Proud
and others the victuallers of the Navie of this Commonwealth, to furnish the sayd
Navie with provisions of victualls as their Agent under them for these two yeares last and upwards and did by
their order and appointment provide himselfe lade, and cause his this deponents ?source
to lade on board the Sea fflower arlate whereof the
arlate Thomas Harris was Master, (and alsoe reputed sole Owner)
certayne hogsheads and barrells conteyning in them eleven thousand eight
hundred and twenty, fower pounds peeces of beefe, and eleven thousand
eight hundred and three, two pound peeces of porke, and caused the same
soe to be laded and put on board the sayd shipp about the first day of
may 1653 to be transported from Bristoll arlate to Portsmouth
arlate for the use of this Commonwealth to victuall their Navie there
therewith, and the sayd shipp departed therewith about the Month of
May aforesayd with intente to transporte the same to Portsmouth
aforesayd, the premisses hee the better knoweth for that hee this deponent
bought all the sayd beefe and porke, and sawe the same loaded on board
the sayd shipp at the publique key of Bristoll aforesayd, And saith that
as hee this deponent hath bin certified by letters from the sayd Thomas Harris
the Master of the sayd shipp and alsoe by letters from one mr Manley an
agent alsoe to the sayd Colonell Pride and the other Victualers of the Navie
aforesayd living at Plymouth (which letters hee beleeveth to be true) the sayd
shipp the Sea fflower was in her Course towards Portsmouth mett with
and seized by a dutchman of Warr with the said victuals on board her and by her carried to Saint Malloe in
ffrance, and coming forth to Sea againe from thence with the sayd
Beefe and Porke in her the
sayd shipp the Sea fflower with her sayd victualls or a great part thereof
on board her was retaken by the Saphir ffrigatt arlate and by her
brought into Plymouth arlate where as this deponent beleeveth she
still remayneth and the beefe and porke in her which was taken therewith [XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX]
And further to these articles hee cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.124r Annotate
To the 4th article of the sayd allegation hee saith that
for the reasons before expressed videlicet for that hee was Agent to the victualers
aforesayd and in their behalfe did buy and provide all the Beefe and Porke aforesayd
hee well knoweth that the same cost, and was worth at the tyme of thee
ladeing thereof on board the sayd shipp the sea fflowers nyne hundred pounds
tenn shillings of lawfull English money, and beleiveth the same was worth
as many at the tyme of the seizure arlate and alsoe when it was retaken
and further cannot depose

To the 5th hee sayth the arlate Colonell Pride and the post of the Victualers
arlate are English men and subiects of this Comonwealth and soe Accompted
And further hee cannot depose

To the last hee saith that his foregoeing deposition is true

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith that hee was not in the Shipp the Sea fflower
when shee went from Bristoll but was on shoare and see her sett sayle from
thence and further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose (saving his foregoeing
deposicon to which hee referreth) for that hee was not present at either of the seizures
made of her, but had only received advise thereof as aforesayd by letters.

To the second Interrogatorie hee saith that hee this deponent (by name John Snowe) bought
the sayd beefe and porke and laded the same as a foresayd by the order of the sayd Colonell
Thomas Pride and the rest of the victualers of the Navie of this Commonwealth and at
their proper cost and charge and they the sayd victualers were really to have borne the
losse thereof if it had not bin retaken And saith they did not take it nor were
to take it at a prize in case it came safe to Portsmouth Interrogate.

To the third hee saith hee hath not seene the beefe and porke now claymed since first
hee this deponent caused it to be laden on board at Bristoll but beleeveth that
it is the same which was laden upon the Accompt of the victualers and Navy Interrogated
And further cannot depose

To the last Interrogatorie hee saith hee cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and Doctorr
Godolphin.

John: Snowe [SIGNATURE]
----
The seventh of November 1653

Examined on the allegation on behalfe of the sayd William [XXXX]

A business of clearing and dischargeing William ?Jope)
and the Shipp named the Endeavour (whereof the sayd)
William Jope is Master) from the matters conteyned in)
a pretended protest made against him by Daniell)
ffairvacks (sic) ffraighter of the sayd shipp, and of [?recovering])
of the moneys due for the service of the sayd Shipp since)
the 20th day of July last of this present yeare 1653)
[GUTTER XXX]ded by the says William ?Jope against the sayd)
Daniell ffayrefaxe (sic) Budd Smith)

John Thurmwood of Redriff in the
County of Surrey Mariner Masters Mate
of the sayd shipp the Endeavour aged 46
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth and followeth
videlicet

To the first second and 4th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and
~~~
[MISSING FOLIOS]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.130r Annotate
The 20th day of September 1653

A Busines of Examination of Witnesses)
for the perpetuall Remembrance of the)
matter on behalfe of the Keeper of)
the Liberty of England by authority of)
Parliament concerning the losse of a)
Certaine shipp named the Harry)
Bonadventure whereof Robert Swanley)
was Captaine and the goods that were)
in her and concerning a certaine shipp)
or vessell named the Saint Peter where of)
one Claes Symondson Cohone was master)
being a shipp formerly belonging to)
the Dutch subiects of the States of the)
united Provinces and taken and seized by)
Captaine Swanly in the sayd shipp the Harry)
Bonadventure in the immediate service of)
this Commonwealth Bud)

Examined upon an Allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Keeper of the
Liberty of England by Authorty
of Parliament.

Lorenzo Michael of Sevill in
Spayne Corporall of the sayd shipp
the Harry Bonadventure aged thirty
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. vidlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in the monethes of January ffebruary and March 1652. and in March
Aprill May June and July of this present yeare 1653. the arlate shipp
the Harry Bonadventure was imployed and sett to sea in the immediate
service of the Commonwealth upon a warlike voyage under the Command
of the arlate Captaine Robert Swanley with a lawfull Commission to
surprize and take all ffrench shipps; and all Dutch shipps belonging
to any Port or place of the United Provinces, and all other shipps
whatsoever belonging to the knowne enemies of this Commonwealth and
the sayd shipp did proceed upon the sayd designe and expediccon accordingly
The premisses this deponent knoweth to be true for that he served in the
sayd shipp during all the tyme aforesayd as Corporall of the Souldiers
on board her, and saw the Commission aforessaid on board, which sayd
Commission the sayd Captaine Swanly did of the knowledge of this deponent
execute on the behalfe of this Commonwealth And otherwise cannot depose

To the second Article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that in the monthes of May or June last past the tyme otherwise he remembreth
not, The sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure by Order from Mr Longland
Agent att Leghorne for this Commonwealth of England sett sayle from
Messina towards Tunis, and in her Course thithe, haveing neere Cape
[?Spertovento] mett with two dutch shippes who assaulted the Harry Bonadventure
and made shott against her, The sayd Captaine Robert Swanley and Company
in pursuance of their sayd Commission and by vertue of the same fought
with the sayd two dutch shipps with their sayd shipp of warr the Harry
Bonadventure, and after a sharpe dispatch for the space of four houres
or thereabouts after much dammage and hurt to the Harry Bonadventure
subdued surprized and tooke the better and stronger of the sayd two dutch
shipps, that is to say the sayd shipp the Saint Peter whereof Clases Symondson
Cohone was master or Commander, together with all the goods and ladings
that
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.130v Annotate
that were on board her, and tooke out the Companie of the
Saint Peter, (the sayd Master Clases Symondson being slayne in the fight) and
putt them aboard the Harry Bonadventure and became absolute maisters (sic) and
Possessors of the says shipp the Saint Peter and all her lading.  The premisses
This deponent knoweth to be true, being Corporall of the Souldiers of the
sayd Harry Bonadventure and present aboard and engaged in the sayd fight
and knowing and seing the premisses so had and done as he hath now
declared, and otherwise cannot depose of.

To the third Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth That
the sayd shipp the Saint Peter was of the burthen of 500 tonnes or therabouts
and was compleatly fitted with Rigging, anchors Cables mast yards and
other appurtenances, and victualled for 2 or 3 monthes, and carryed aboard
24 gunnes of a good large size with all necessaryes, and powder shott
musketts pistolls Carbines, pikes halfe pikes and other munition of warr
answereable.  And further saith she was richly laden with divers sorts of
rich goods and merchandizes of the sight of this deponent as full as she could well voard, as [?namels]
600 Chests of Quicksylver. severall great quantityes of Rice.  [XXXXX]
Currants ffennell and Comin (OR, cumin) seedsm ffustick and almonds the certaine ?quantutyes
whereof this deponent cannot sett forth. And saith there was likewise on board
her a great quantity of looking glasses and drinking glasses and allso of [XX GUTTER]
and other wares of great value which this deponent cannot specify. And
further saith that he heard the Purser of the sayd shipp the Saint Peter [XX GUTTER]
two hundred thowasand Crownes, and soemuch this deponent beleiveth  the
same were worth, And further having not perused nor examined the
papers arlate he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that of the
knowledge and sight of this deponent being Corporall of the Harry Bonadventure
as aforesayd, the arlate shipp the Saint Peter and the other dutch shipp in Company
with her fought with and against the Harry Bonadventure by the pace of
fower hourse or thereabouts and made many shotts att her and endeavoured
to surprize and take her, And farther saith that of the sight of this deponent
att the beginning of the sayd Chase or fight the sayd Harry Bonadventure
had out and wore the English Colours of this Commonwealth , and the sayd
two dutch shipps by and for all the sayd tyme had out and wore the said
Colours of the States of the united Provinces, this deponent being aboard the
Harry Bonadventure for all the sayd tyme, and knoweing and seeing
the premisses.  And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he heard the Purser [XX GUTTER]
Shoreman Chyrugion and others of the Company of the Saint Peter arlate [?agree]
they were subdued and taken as a foresayd say and declare severall tymes
that they and the rest of the sayd shippes Company were dutchmen subiects of
the States of the united Provinces and that the sayd shipp the Saint Peter did
belong to the Port of Amsterdam in Holland and that her owners did there
dwell and inhabite, and that all and singular the goods and  Lading aboard the
sayd shipp were laden for the Accompt of the subiects of the sayd States of
the united Provinces, and that the sayd shipp and her lading were bound
for Amsterdam and that her ladeing was ther to be discharged, And saith the
sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.131r Annotate
the sayd Purser and others of the Company of the Saint Peter did make the sayd
Confessions and declarations freely and voluntarily without any monaies
offered to them or any of them; And further saith that he this deponent saw
severall Letters ?found aboard the said shipp Peter which by the endorsements
thereof were directed to Amsterdam, and severall persons inhabiting there
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that upon the
taking of the sayd shipp the Saint Peter, she being not able to keepe the sea
and the wind being contrary to goe to Tunis, and the sayd shipp the Harry
Bonadventure being much dammaged in her masts and rigging by reason
of the fight aforesayd, the arlate Captaine Swanley and Company about the
beginning of June last the tyme otherwise he remembreth not
returned with both the sayd shipps into Messina, and there provided
themeselves of masts and other necessaries requisit to in able the sayd shipps
to proceed to Tunis aforesayd, the premisses he knoweth being aboard
the Harry Bonadventure and returning in her to Messina in Company
of the Saint Peter. And otherwise cannot depose-

The seventh article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith and deposeth that the
Governors and Inhabitants of Messina being subiects of the King of Spaine
taking notice that the English had brought thither a prize of great value
taken from the dutch as aforesayd used meanes to dispossesse the sayd
Captaine Swanley and his Company of the sayd Prize, and to that purpose have
intelligence to a Dutch shipp called the Great Lyon that came from Smyrna
and into the Road of Messina
to avoyd the sayd Road much to the preuîudice of the English
And more over saith that he this deponent by the order of Captaine Swanley
after treaty had with the sayd Governor for necessary provisions, to facilitate
that service presented and delivered to the sayd Governor as a present fifty
?Chiqueenes of gold and a faire Chest of Venice glasses, being in all
to the value of 150 Crownes, whereupon the sayd Governor promised the
sayd Captaine Swanley all fitting accomodations, But this deponent saith that
the premisses notwithstanding, the sayd Governor and Inhabitants of Messina
would not nor did suffer the sayd captaine Swanley and Company to fetch
from the shoare the masts which they had provided as aforesayd but kept and deteyned the same
from them, this deponent being an eye witnesse of their deportment and
carriage in that particular. And further he cannot depose.

To the eigth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That the sayd Captaine
Swanley thereupon sent John Merrick the leiftenant of the Harry Bonadventure
and him this deponent Corporall thereof a shoare att Messina to procure and
buy fresh pieces of timber as might make their old masts serviceable for
supply of their present necessity, who being come a shoare, he the the (sic) sayd
John Merrick and this deponent were by order of the Governor of Messina and
without any offence given, or iust cause shewed by the Governor cast in to prison
without any examination, and saith the premisses happened in the moneth
of June XX last past. the tyme otherwise he remembreth not. An otherwise
he cannot depose saving, he heard the Governo:r of Messina Don Antonio
[XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.131v Annotate
de Torres say and declare to this deponent being a Spaniard and well and
perfectly understanding the Spanish tongue, that he would not permitt
the Harry Bonadventure to you from Messina till a dutch shipp the XXX
aforesayd were safely arrived there frō Alexandria, and that he kept the
deponent and the sayd John Merick prisoners con[XXXX]ing that Captaine
Swanley would not dept to sea without his Leivetenant and Corporall.
To the .9. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that whilest this deponent
and the sayd Merick were deteyned att Messina, the Governor of Messina
or some by his order furnished the dutch formerly of the Saint Peters Compan?y
and released and suffered to goe att Large by Captaine Swanly, with severall
ff[XXXX]as or boates with ammunition and necessaries to goe aboard the ?Great
Lyon aforesayd a dutch shipp for their further assistance,. And further saith
that the sayd Governor and his people seized and tooke the ?ffolenta or
boate belonging to Captaine Swanly and dispossessed him thereof and still ?XX
detayne the same, and tooke and deteyned seven of the sayd Captaine Swanleys
Company that went a shoare with the sayd boat; and doe still jeepe and
deteyne the sayd seven persons belonging to the ?ffelensa
as this deponent beleiveth, by meanes ?whereof
the sayd Captaine Swanley receyved much prejudice and was deprived of men
to send abroad to gaine intelligence for the better prosecution of his XXXXX
in the service of the Commonwealth. And further he cannot depose.

To the .10:th. he saith that whilest This deponent was a prisoner att Messina
in the moneth of June as aforesayd the tyme otherwise he remembreth not
the sayd Captaine Swanley sett sayle from Messina with the Harry Bonadventure
together with the prize named the Saint Peter and her lading, intending
as soone as was possible to reach Tunis according to the Order of Mr
Longland aforesayd, And this deponent saith that after it was knowne
to the Governo:r aforesd that Captaine Swanley was gone as aforesayd, this
deponent and the sayd Merick were released, and after a day or two
in a shipps boat belonging to another prize shipp taken by the ?English
overtooke the Harry Bonadventure upon the Coast of Sicily in her XXX
for Tunis, and then understood the manner of their comeing of ?from
Messina and their intended designe for Tunnis as aforesayd. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that about 12 dayes after the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure and
the sayd prize the Saint Peter departed from Messina upon their course
towards Tunis the winds being something crosse, and sailing along
the Coast of Sicilia they espied seven sayle of dutch shipps under
the Isles off of the Port of Trapany in Scicily, and three sayle more
of dutch shippes comeing out of the sayd Port of Trapany. This deponent
being aboard the Harry Bonadventure att the tyme of the sayd Dutch
shipps were discovered by this deponent and the rest of the Company of
the sayd two shipps. And otherwise cannot depose,

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.132r Annotate
To the twelfth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
sayd Captaine Swanley and his Company upon the discovery of the foresayd
Dutch ffleet of the ?sayle of shipps finding themselves in danger advised
together and resolved that the best meanes that they could take for preservation
of themeselves and their sayd shipps was to putt in to the sayd port of Trapany&lt;ref&gt;Trapany (alias Trapani). Port city on the north-west tip of Sicily.&lt;/ref&gt; &lt;ref&gt;[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trapani]&lt;/ref&gt;
which sayd port is a place allso within the dominions of the King of Spaine
and accordingly they did putt into Trapany and gott with both their shipps
within pistoll shott of the ffort, and as neere ground as the burthen of
their shipps would pmitt, this deponent being present and knoweing and
seeing the premisses. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the thirteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth That
the aforesayd Dutch shipps following upn the Harry Bonadventure and
the Saint Peter, the arlate Capt Swanley before the dutch shipps arrived
or came into the port tooke his master or leivetenant John Merick aforesd
and him this deponent being Corporall of the Harry Bonadventure along
with him and addressed himselfe to the Governor of Trapany Don Antonia
Rois de Chavis, and demanded of the sayd Governors if he would protect
them and their sayd two shipps in his port, representing to him the danger
they were in by the dutch shipps aforesayd making towards the sayd
port: And thereupon the Governor promised that the sayd dutch shipps
should not come into the sayd port, and in case they did yet the English
and their sayd two shipps should not be molested, and thereof bad the
sayd Captaine Swanley to be secure, for that noe one should affront the English
in the chamber of his Master the King of Spaine, The premisses this
deponent knoweth to be true being one that accompanies the sayd
Captaine Swanley as aforesayd and being a Spaniard assisting the
sayd Captaine in his Treaty with the sayd Governor and was present and
saw and heard the passages aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the premisses
not withstanding the sayd Governor of Trapanie (sic) contrary to his promise
suffered the sayd dutch shipps under the command of ?Young Van
Trump to come in to the sayd Port of Trapany and treated with the sayd
Van Trump, and messengers passed to and fro betwixt them in the sight
of this deponent who saw them so passe to and fro in the sayd Governors
owne boat, and saw and observed that the dutch shipps forbore to enter
the port till the returne of their messenger from the Governo:r and then
immediately made into and entred the sayd Port. And further faith that
att the same tyme that the sayd Governors boat passed as aforesayd betweene
Vantrumps (sic) sayd fleet and the shoare, he the sayd Governor sent a messenger
to captaine Swanly in a boat which Messenger in the Governors name and in the
presence and hearing of this deponent commanded the sayd Captaine Swanly and
Companie that on paine of death they should not shoot so much as a pistoll
in port for that in his Masters Chamber the King of Spaine they
were and should be secure and safe, And further saith that the sayd
Boat wherein the Messenger from the sayd Governor came to Captaine Swanles
had
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.132v Annotate
had therein a Messenger of the sayd Young Van Trump, being his [?said]
Interpreter and knoweth him this deponent, who then immediately went
off from the Harry Bonadventure, and in the sayd Governors boat in the
sight of this deponent arrived att Vantrumps owne shipp, And saith That
immediately thereupon the sayd dutch shipps made upp to the place where
the Harry Bonadventure and the prize the Saint Peter lay, and two of the
sayd dutch shipps in the sight of this deponent ?clapped aboard the sayd prize
the Saint Peter, and four other dutch shipps clapped aboard the Harry
Bonadventure, wherby the Company of the sayd Dutch shipps possessed
themselves of both the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure and the Saint
Peter lying both within pistoll shott of the ffort of Trapany as aforesayd
this deponent being then in the castle of Trapany and seeing all the sayd passages. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the fifteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that to colour this
busines there were about 12 small gunnes discharged from the Castle of
Trapany aforesayd but without shott, and noe execution done upon any of the
sayd Dutch shipps though one of their men of Warr was a ground. The
premisses this deponent knoweth to be true, for that he was by Captaine Swanley
afterwards upon the approach of the sayd Dutch shipps to make the sayd
seizure, sent a shoare, and gott accrosse into the Castle, and there saw the
souldiers manage the gunnes they so shott off as afoesayd, and by the
report or sound therof knoweth they were not laden with bullet
and saw two or three of the sayd Gunnes charged with powder onely and
noe bullet putt therein, being present att the tyme of their such chargeing
and from the sayd Castle walls saw the sayd English mann of warr and
prize Saint Peter boarded and seized as aforesayd, and one of the dutch
men of warr a ground as aforesayd, without any hurt or execution done upon
the dutch shipps from the sayd Castle. which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Captaine
Swanley and Companie perceyving themeselves betrayed in manner as aforesayd
videlicet so many of them as were not kept aboard the sayd dutch shippes
endeavoured to gett into the sayd Castle to make some shotts themselves against
the sayd dutch shipps, but they were beaten downe and kept out by the
Captaine of the Castle and not permitted so to doe, this deponent being att that
tyme in the castle and seeing and observing the premisses. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the seventeenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
sayd van Trump after he had surprized both the sayd shipps the Harry
Bonadventure and the Saint Peter of the sight and observation of this
deponent struck his flagg three tymes and saluted the Towne with 5 or
7 gunnes, which thing according to the common interpretation of such actions
and as this deponent beleiveth were by him done in token of his respect
and thankfullness to the sayd Towne and Governors. And further he cannot
depose

To the eighteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth That
after the sayd Van Trump was gone away with the sayd two shipps [?there]
remained
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.133r Annotate
remained in the sayd Port of Trapanie two dutch merchants shipps till the
next day after, and saith that notwithstanding the sayd Captaine Swanly desired
and demanded of the sayd Governor satisfaction in the premisses, noe restraint
was made of the sayd dutch merchants shipps nor any meanes used by the
sayd Towne of Governor for remedy of the English, this deponent
being present and seeing the premisses, and hearing the sayd Governor say
he would not meddle with nor lay any restraint upon the sayd two dutch merchants
shipps. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the nineteenth and 20th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about and
soone after the aforesayd passages there was a Common [?brint] and fame anongst
the Inhabitants of Trapany that the English were betrayed by the sayd Governor
and that he the sayd Governor had receyved a large reward or bribe in that
behalfe. And saith that the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure was a
strong and able shipp but the certayne burthen of her he knoweth not.
And saith the sayd shipp was compleatly fitted with Rigging, Anchors
Cables, masts yards and other necessaries, and had 110 men belonging to
her, and was victualled for .6. monethes, and had aboard her 41, gunnes
and two brasse murtering peices, and necessaries thereto appertaining
and had about 142 Kintalls of powder with musketts carbines pistolls
hatchetts, barrs and round shott proportionable, and had aboard severall
good quantities of merchandizes the particulars whereof This deponent
cannot sett forth, and had likewise aboard diverse goods and necessaries
belonging to the sayd Captaine Swanley and Company (the particulars whereof
this deponent cannot sett forth, And this deponent saith himselfe had
aboard the sayd shipp for his owne Accompt att the tyme of her seizure by the dutch shipps aforesayd
monyes and Cloathes to the value .15: li sterlin and A gold chayne of the cleare
value of 55: li sterling And he verily beleiveth that the sayd shipp the
Harry Bonadventure with her tackle furniture and moneys and lading
aboard her was well worth the summa of 12 thousand pounds sterling and
upwards. And further he cannot depose.

To the one and twentyeth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and verily beleiveth
that the losse of the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure and allso of the sayd
shipp the Saint Peter and all their respective ladings was occassioned through
the violence contrivance and fraud of the sayd Governor of Messina, and
Trapany, and saith and verily beleiveth that in case the Company of the
Harry Bonadventure had not bene prisoners att and abused att Messina
and if the sayd Governor of Trapany had not betrayed the sayd shippes
but had (as he might and ought to have done according to his promise)
protected and defended the same whilst they lay in the Port of Trapany
and within the Command of the Gunnes Castle and fforts of the sayd
Towne, the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure and the sayd ?prize the
Saint Peter and their respective ladings might and would have beene
preserved in the possession of the sayd captaine Swanly and Company
and not have bene taken by the Dutch nor lost to the English. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith this depositions are true-

Repeated before Doctor Clerke)
and Doctor Godolphin)

Loewnso [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.133v Annotate
The 22th day of September 1653
Examined upon the sayd allegation

2.

James Collett of the parish of Stepney in Middlesex
Cooper of the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure
aged eight and twenty yeares or thereabouts a
Witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in January
ffebruary March Aprill May and June now last past the arlate
shipp the Harry Bonadventure was ymployed and sett out to sea in a warlike
voyage in the immediate service of this Commonwealth under the Command
of the arlate Captaine Robert Swanly, against the Dutch and
other enemyes of this Commonwealth, and proceeded upon the sayd designes
accordingly this deponent being Cooper in her and serving aboard her
all the sayd tyme And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponents aith that upon the 19 day of
May 1653 the arlate shipp the Harry Bonadventure sett sayle from Messina
upon the sayd warlike expediccon, and being out att sea upon or about the
21th day of May 1653 mett with two dutch shipps, which engaged
in fight with the Harry Bonadventure, till at last the Harry Bonadventure
after four howres ?dispate subdued tooke and surprized the bigger of
them named the Saint Peter together with all the goods in the same; and
saith the sayd Captaine Swanley and Company tooke the Company of the
Saint Peter out of her in to their owne shipp, and therby be came absoluteXX
possessed of the sayd shipp the Saint Peter and her lading the Master
of the sayd shipp being slayne in the ffight. All which this deponent
knoweth being aboard the Harry Bonadventure att the tyme of the sayd
ffight and seizure. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent sayth that the arlate
shipp the Saint Peter was of the burthen of 500 tunnes or thereabouts
and was a compleat able shipp well fitted with all necessaries. and
of the sight of this deponent was as fully Laden as she could well bee
having as many goods in her holds as could be stowed, and a good ?quantity
of goods in her Gunn deck. And saith her ladeing was very rich
goods videlicet, quicksylver, Rice, Anniseeds, Comin seeds, Almonds and other
merchandizes, the particular parcell of the goods this deponent cannot
sett forth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that XX
sayd ship the Saint Peter and the other Dutch shipp in Company with her
fought against the Harry Bonadventure four or five houres and ?did
their utmost endeavo:r to sinke and destroy her, and saith during thXXX
whole Chase and fight the Harry Bonadventure wore the English Colours
and the Saint Peter and the sayd other dutch shipp the Holland Colours, and
which this deponent well saw and observed. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the Saint Peter
was subdued as aforesayd he this deponent heard the Steersman Carpenter
and some others of the Peters Company that could speake the English
tongue say and affirme that they and their Company were dutchmen
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.134r Annotate
and their shipp was bound for Holland and was to touch att Leghorne
and the?nce to goe into Holland in Company of other dutch shipp with a
Convoy of Holland Men of warr. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 6th he saith that after the sayd fight was over the sayd shipp Harry
Bonadventure and the sayd prize shipp being hurt and damnifyed in
their masts and tackling the sayd Captaine Swanley returned back with them
both to Messina there to fitt them with such necessaries as were requisit
this deponent going back to Messina in the Harry Bonadventure And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 7th he saith that Captaine Swanly after he came to Messina did provide
two new masts for the sayd prize the Saint Peter and fitted them and made XXX
ready by his owne carpenter ashoare, but saith the sayd masts were never
brought aboard; which as this deponent heard y:e sayd Captaine Swanly
and others say came to passe by the default and injurious dealing of the
Governor of Messina, which is a place subiect to the King of Spaine.
and saith the sayd Captaine Swanly was forced to make use of the old broken
masts of the Saint Peter and to ?peice them and mend them with peices of
timber, being deprived of the sayd new masts by him provided as aforesd.
this deponent being aneye witnes thereof. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .8th. he saith that Captaine Swanly sent John Merrick then newly
appoynted Master of the Saint Peter, and the Corporall of his owne shipp being
a Spaniard to provide some timber and other necessaries a shoare in
Messina who were there detained prisoners severall dayes till the sayd
Captaine Swanley was gone out to sea with his sayd shipp of warr and
the sayd prize shipp, and came not aboard againe till the sayd shipps had bene
att sea about two dayes. And saith the sayd Captaine Swanley depted from
Messina with his sayd prize shipp about the 12th day of June 1653. This
deponent being in the Harry Bonadventure and goeing out to sea
with him. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .9th he saith that the Governor and Inhabitants of Messina or some
of them by his authority did take and seize the ffelensa or shipps boate
belonging to the Harry Bonadventure whilest Captaine Swanley remained
att Messina as aforesd, and kept and still do keepe the same, and tooke allso
and detajned, six mariners serving under the sayd Captaine Swanley in the
sayd ffelensa, by meanes whereof the sayd Captaine Swanley and the service
of this Commonwealth was much prejudiced, the meanes of sending abroad
for intelligence being thereby cutt off. the premisses this deponent knoweth
being att Messina when the sayd ffelensa and men in her were so seized and
deteyned. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .10th. he saith That on or about the 12th day of June English stile the
sayd Capt Swanley taking the Advantage of a wind sett sayle with his owne
shipp and the sayd prize shipp with her lading aforesd from Messina and sayled along by the Coast
of Sicily intending for Tunis, this deponent then being in the
sayd Harry Bonadventure. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .11.th and 12th he saith that on or about the 25th day of June newstile the sayd
Captaine Swanley and Company with their two shipps the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter saling along the Coasts of Scicily and beating to windward
the wind being contrary, espeyed, under the Isles of Trapany 7 dutch
shipps, and three shipps more comeing off from Trapany; and thereupon
finding.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.134v Annotate
finding themselves in danger resolved to putt into the Port of Trapany
to preserve themselves, and accordingly did so, and gott in and anchored
both their said shipps within pistoll shott of the ffort of Trapanie.
this deponent being the?n present and knoweing and seeing the premisses

To the 13th. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd dutch
shipps following in upon the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter, Captaine
Swanley aforesayd, sent his Corporall aforesayd being a Spaniard to
treat with the Governor of Trapanie, and to know whether he would
protect the sayd two shipps the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter as
shipps apptaining to the English, and accordingly the sayd Corporall
went and att his returne ?told the sayd Captaine Swanley, that the sayd Governor
bade him rest secure, and that he and his said shipps should be protected there, And saith
the premisses happened about an howre before the sayd dutch shipps entred
the Port. which he knoweth being then present in the sayd Port. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 14. he saith that upon the approach of the sayd dutch ffleet which
was Commanded by Young Van Trump, there came a Messenger from
the Governor of Trapany bidding Captaine Swanley and his Companie not
to feare the sayd approach of Van Trump, for that he should not
molest the English in that Port, and with all saying that the Governor
did Commande that there should be noe shott made by the sayd Captaine
Swanley or his Companie in that Port. And further saith that att
the same tyme he this deponent observed two boates to passe to and
fro betwixt the sayd dutch ffleet and Trapany, and that the sayd
Van Trump upon the comeing of one of the sayd boates to him did
immediately wi?th .6. sayle of shipps make into the mould or Port of
Trapany and notwithstanding the Governors sayd promises of protection
boarded the Saint Peter aforesayd with two of his shipps, and the Harry
Bonadventure with four of his sayd shipps, and there by possessed XXX
of the sayd Harry Bonadventure, and the Saint Peter and her lading
lyeing within pistoll shott of the ffort of Trapanie as aforesayd - All
which this deponent knoweth to be true seeing the sayd passages and
being taken Prisoner in the henry Bonadventure att the same tyme
by the Dutch videlicet upon or about the 25th day of June English stile
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 15th. he saith that att the tyme of the sayd seizure there were
some gunnes shott off from the fforts of Trapanie, with powder
onely and without bullet, which this deponent well knoweth by the
smoake, and sound or report thereof, and beleiveth the sayd shott was
made for a colour onely, and knoweth there was noe execution done upon
the dutch or their shipps. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 16th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 17th he saith that the sayd Van Trump when he went off from Trapany
after the sayd surprizeall of the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter
saluted the Governor, and Towne of Trapany in the hearing of this
deponent with .7. Gunnes. and struck his flagg allso as this deponent
hath credibly heard. And otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.135r Annotate
To the .18. he saith that the sayd Van Trump after the seizure aforesayd
did ride att an anchor two dayes within Command of the Castle of
TRapany with his owne 7 saile of shipps and the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter aforesayd without any molestation att all which this
deponent knoweth being prisoner the same tyme aboard the little
Saint Marke one of his sayd 7 shipps; and saith he knoweth nothing
of the dutch merchants shipps allegate. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 19th he saith. That being prisoner aboard the Little Saint Marke
as aforesayd he this deponent heard two Scotch men belonging to
the Gunroome thereof, and three of four dutchmen speaking the
English tongue say and affirme that the Purser of the sayd shipp
the Little Saint Marke was ymployed by the sayd Van Trump to the Governour
of Trapanie aforesayd for the betraying of the sayd shipps
the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter aforesayd he the sayd Purser speaking the Spanish tongue and that the
sayd Van Trump did by the sayd Purser present and deliver to the
sayd Governour the summe of fifteene hundred duckatts in that behalf
and that the sayd Governour receyved the same from him accordingly
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 20th he saith the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure was of the burthen of
betwixt 300 and 400 tonnes and was Compleatly rigged and fitted with all
necessaries, and was victualled for .6. monethes and had 41 gunnes abord her
and about 100 kintalls of powder with weapons of war and ammunition requisite
and answerable for a shipp of that burthen in a warlike ymployment, And
had aboard her a quantity of Anniseeds and other merchandizes that had bene
taken into her one out of the Prize shipp, and allso divers goods and necessaryes
belonging to the sayd Captaine Swanley and Company. and this deponent for his
owne particular had and lost in her goods Cloathes Instruments and
other things to the Cleare value of
fifty eight pounds sterling and Richard Herbert Late Masters mate of the sayd
shipp had and lost goods and Clothes and Instruments in the sayd shipp to the value of 56 li - 19 s . 4 d sterling
And otherwise he cannot depose not knowing the value of the whole losse.

To the 21th he saith that the sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure and the sayd shipp
the Saint Peter with their respective lading were lost as he beleiveth by the
fraud contrivance and practises of the sayd Governours of Messina and Trapanie
or one of them, And verily beleiveth that if the sayd Governour of Messina
had not imprisoned the sayd Captaine Swansons men nor taken away the ffelensa
from him, or in case the sayd Governour of Trapany had protected the sayd
shipps as he might well have done, and not betrayed them as he did, they
the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter and their ladeing respectively
had bene preserved in the possession of the sayd Captaine Swanley and
Company, and would not have bene taken by the sayd Van Trump and
his dutch shipps nor lost to the English. And otherwise cannot depose

To the last he saith heis depositions are true./

James Collett [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.135v Annotate
The 23th of September 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3/

Robert Tibbet of Limehouse in the County of Middlesex
Mariner Master of the sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure
aged six and forty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the first and second articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith
that the arlate shipp the harry Bonadventure from about the beginning
of January 1652 till the month of June 1653 was imployed in a warlike
voyage under the Command of the sayd Robert Swanley in the service
of this Commonwealth by vertue of a Commission (which this deponent saw and
heard read) to take all dutch and ffrench shipps, and the shipps of all or any the
Enemies of this Commonwealth. And saith that in Pursuance of the sayd
Commission the sayd shipp sett sayle from Messina in Scicilia about the
19th day of may 1653 and in her course for Tunis whither she stood bound
off the Cape Pertevento mett with two dutch shipps, and chased them
and one of the Dutch shipps videlicet the Saint Peter aforesayd giveing the first fire before the
harry Bonadventure made any shott, a sharp fight was begun and
continued four or five howres, till att Last the Saint Peter was subdued
and taken together with all her lading and the master
of her killed in the fight, and all or most part of her Company taken
aboard the sayd harry Bonadventure, whereby the sayd Captaine Swanley
and Company became absolute Masters and Possessors of the Saint Peter and
her lading, all which this deponent knoweth being master of the sayd
harry Bonadventure and present att and in the sayd fight, and seeing
the sayd seizure made and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith the sayd shipp the Saint Peter was an able shipp of about
400 Tonnes and 24 Guns with powder and other necessaries, and was
in her masts and rigging much damnified in the sayd fight, And saith
she was very full laden with Currants Anniseeds, Almonds quicksylver
Venice glasses, stones for looking glasses, and Manna and other rich
Commodityes the particulars of all or any whereof this deponent
knoweth not nor the certayne value of all or any of them, but doth
beleive that being a shipp of a large a burthen and Laden with goods
of that quality she might well be worth with her Ladeing the summe of
fifty thousand pounds sterling. And saith he heard the Steeresman of the
Saint Peter say she was a very rich shipp. And further cannot depose

To the 4 and .5th he saith that the harry Bonadventure during the sayd Chase and
fight wore the English Colours of this Commonwealth, and the says shipp the
Saint Peter being the bigger of the sayd dutch shipps, and the other Dutch
shipp during all the sayd tyme wore the Holland Colours and fought against
the Harry Bonadventure four or five howres. And further saith That
the Steeresman and others of the Company of the Saint Peter speaking broken
English did after their seizure confesse and acknowledge that they
and the shipps Company or most of them were Hollanders, and that their sayd shipp
did belong to Holland, and was with her sayd Lading bound for Holland
and there was to discharge the same for the use and Accompt of Hollanders
which
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.136r Annotate
which this deponent knoweth for the reasons aforesayd, and hearing the
sayd confessed and acknowledged XXXXX made in the presence of this deponent
and others; and saith he heard not any thing to the contrary thereof from any
of them but heard some of them farther say that they did in tend, if
they had escaped the Harry Bonadventure, to seeke for Holland Men of
Warr to convoy them home. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .6th. and .7th. he saith that the sayd shipp Saint Peter being much damnifyed
in her masts rigging and hull in the sayd fight Captaine Swanley returned
with her and his sayd shipp of Warr back againe to Messina being in the dominions of the King of Spaine and there
provided himselfe of 2 masts a shore one for the prize shipp and
another for the sayd shipp of warr she having likewise recyved hurt
in the sayd fight. Annd saith the sayd masts being so provided the
Officers of the sayd Towne or Citty of Messina by the authority of the
Governor and Juratts thereof hindred the sayd Captaine Swanley from bringing
the sayd masts aboard, but delayed and kept them a shoare notwithstanding
the sayd Captaine Swanley presented the sayd Governor and other officers of Messina with a Chest of Venice
Glasses of good valew upon his promise to supply him the sayd Captaine
Swanley with such necessaryes as he wanted. The premisses he knoweth
being att the premisses present and aboard the Harry Bonadventure att
Messina, and likewise being a shoare and seeing the sayd masts fitted
and made by Captaine Swanleys owne Carpenters. and otherwise cannot depose

To the 8th and 9th hee saith that the sayd Captaine Swanley att the tyme of
such his being att Messina with his sayd 2 shipps sent John Merrick the
master of the prize shipp and Lorenzo ?Mishaut a Spaniard the Corporall
of his owne shipp a shoare in Company of a Broker of Messina to buy and
provide necessaries for the sayd shipps. And saith the sayd Merick and
the sayd Corporall severall sayes were detayned and kept Prisoners att Messina
so that they returned not to the sayd shipps till they had bene a day or two
out att sea, And saith the sayd Captaine Swanley was forced to putt out to Sea
before he had sufficiently fitted his shipps aswell through the
abuses that were daily offered to him, as by the advertisement sent
to him from some English merchants in Messina whose letters this deponent
heard read, in which the sayd Merchants did advise the sayd Swanley
to take the first opportunity to dept, for that there was a consultation ?had
by the Governor and Juratts of Messina to wrest his sayd prize shipp
and her lading from him, and that for that purpose they had caused
it to be given out that he had landed some Quicksylver without notice
of the same given to the officers of the Towne and contrary to the rules
of that port, under ?role whereof and other pretences if the sayd Swanley
did not speadily avoyd the port they would arrest and in?filtrae the sayd
prize shipp and her lading. And more over saith that the sayd Captaine
Swanley did there hire a ?ffelonea with about 9 men in her to attend his
sayd shipps by the moneth to goe abroad to gaine intelligence, which
?ffelonia and her man the Governor of the sayd place, seized and deteyned
from him to his hreat preiudice and ?difference of this Commonwealth, which
This deponent knoweth being Master of the Harry Bonadventure and
present with her and the sayd prize shipp at Messina aforesayd. And otherwise
cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.136v Annotate
To the 10. 11. 12 and 13. hee saith that the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter sett sayle from Messina upon or about the 12th day of January 1653
toward Tunis by order of Mr Longland Agent for this Commonwealth att
Leghorne, and sayling along the Coasts of Scicily after ?13 dayes sayle
espied 7 dutch men of Warr under the Islands before Trapany
and three merchant dutch shipps comeing from TRapany, and
saith that thereupon Captaine Swanley and Companie resolved to putt into
Trapany being a place subiect to the sayd King of Spaine and accordingly did so, and by the order of the Captain
of the Castle there, who promised them protection anchored with both
the sayd shipps within pistoll shott of the ffort there, and saith that the
Governour of Trapany did likewise afterwards promise the sayd
Captaine Swanley and his sayd two shipps protection and security against
the sayd dutch shipps which followed on upon the harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter aforesayd toward the ?Saint ?Porto of Trapany, this deponent
being present and hearing the aforesayd Spanish Corporall make
interpretation of and declare the effect of the sayd Governours promise
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith that soone after the premisses and before the sayd dutch shipps
entred the Port there came a Messenger in a boat to the sayd Captaine Swanley from
the Governour of Trapany, and in the Governours name Commanded the sayd
Swanley and Company that they should not make any shott, for that they
were in the Chamber of his master the King of Spaine and should
receyve noe injury there by the dutch, and withall sayd he was goeing from
the sayd Governour to the sayd Van Trump with order to tell him that he should
not attempt any thing against the English in that Port. And saith the
sayd Messenger went off immediately towards Trumps shipps, and this
deponent att the same tyme observed abother boat with one man sitting
in the sterne thereof passe of from van Trumps shipp to Trapany. And
he saith that ymmediately upon the Arivall of the Governours sayd Messenger
att the dutch shipps he this deponent observed Van Trump advance
and come on with 6 sayle of his shipps into the mould or port of
Trapany, and saith the sayd Trumpe made upp to the sayd two shipps
and boarded the Saint Peter with 2 of his dutch shipps and the harry
Bonadventure with four of his sayd shipps, and thereby became possessor
of the sayd harry Bonadventure, and Saint Peter, and their Ladeing respectively
all which this deponent knoweth being then present and taken prisoner in the
harry Bonadventure., and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .15.th 16 17th. and 18th he saith that whilest the sayd attempt and surprizeall by the dutch
was made there were some Gunnes shott off  from the ffort of Trapany att Random and without any hurt or
execution done upon the dutch or their shipps; all which wad done for
a colour onley, which this deponent the rather beleiveth for that the sayd
Trump and his shipps together with the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter
taken by him as aforesayd rode two dayes under Command of the Castle
of Trapany without molestation, this deponent being then a prisoner aboard
the Saint Marke one of the sayd Trumps shipps. and in that tyme saw allso
two dutch merchants shipps come off without molestation from Trapany
after the sayd seizure. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 19th. he saith he cannot depose.

To.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.137r Annotate
To the 20th he saith the sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure was of the burthen
of 350 tonnes or thereabouts and was compleatly fitted with rigging
Anchors Cables masts yards and other necessary appurtenances and
tackle and had 41 gunnes with tackle and furniture thereto requisit
and powder sufficient for the use of her selfe, and likewise to furnish
other shipps of this Commonwealth which she went to meet, the certayne
quantity with powder this deponent knoweth not, and had musketts Carbines
pistolls hatchetts and other Instruments and munition of warr fitting
and requisit for a man of warr of her bulke and burthen, and was
victualled for 6 monthes for 100 men and upward; and had some
merchants goods aboard videlicet about 63 baggs of Anniseeds taken out
of the gundecke of the Saint Peter. and 20 tunnes of beverage wine or thereabouts
taken into her att Naples for the use of Captaine Badi?beyes shipp the Paragon.
and severall goods and necessaries belonging to the sayd Captaine
Swanley and his sayd shipps Companie. and this deponent for his
owne part had aboard her att the tyme of her seizure by the dutch in goods
Clothes moneys and other things being all lost to him by the sayd seizure
to the cleare value of eighty pounds sterling. and moreover [XXXX] this deponent suffered 16
dayes imprisonment, and was forced to escape in the night att Leghorne and swimme to shoare for
his Liberty, and in his Journey from Leghorne homeward by Land neere
1000 miles, and expenses in that journey, and losse of tyme all happening
by reason of the sayd seisure, hath suffered further losse and dammage to the
cleare value of thirty pounds sterling and upwards. And saith he knoweth
not the value of the sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure nor the value of
other mens losses therein and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 21th he saith that he verily beleiveth that the sayd Governour of Trapany
might if he would have protected the sayd harry Bonadventure and the Saint Peter
according to his promise, and that in case he had done his best endeavour therein
the sayd shipps and their Ladeing respectively had not bene taken
by the dutch nor lost to the English but had continued in the possession
of the sayd Captaine Swanley and Companie. And otherwise referring
himselfe to his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose./

To the last he saith his depositions are true. and otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated with his precontest
before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin/.

Robert Tibbut [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4.

John Standen of London neere Bottolphs wharfe
Chyrurgeon of the sayd ship the Harry Bonadventure
aged 28 yeares or theraebouts, a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.137v Annotate
To the first and second Articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith
that from about the 7th day of december 1652 English Stile till about the
25th day of June then next ensueing the arlate shipp the harry Bonadventure
was ymployed out to sea as a mann of warr in the service of this Commonwealt
under Command of the sayd Captaine Robert Swanly by vertue of a lawfull
Commission which this deponent saw and heard read, with authority to take
Dutch shipps and all other shipps belonging to the
enemies of this Commonwealth, and saith that in pursuance of the
saud Authority in their Course from Messina to Tunis in orabout the month f [?May] 1653 the sayd harry
Bonadventure neere to Cape Sp[?o]rt[?a]vento mett with two dutch shipps
and fought with them for about three or four howres, and att length
subdued and tooke the bigger of them called the Saint Peter, and the
master of the sayd Saint Peter being slayne in fight, tooke the greatest
part of the Company out of the sayd dutch shipp into the Harry Bonadventure
by meanes whereof the sayd Captaine Swanley and Company became possessed
of the sayd shipp Saint Peter and her lading And otherwise cannot depose
saving that he knoweth the premisses to be true being Chyrurgeon of the
harry Bonadventure and present aboard att the sayd fight and seizure.

To the third fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the
sayd shipp the Saint Peter was a very large and able shipp and had 24.
gunnes and tackle and furniture requisit. and was full laden with goods
of great value, And saith he heard the steersman of the sayd shipp the
Saint Peter in broken English he being this deponents patient, and the Chirurgeon
likewise of the sayd shipp in the Italian tongue and to the understanding
of this deponent say and affirme that the whole Cargazon of the Saint Peters
ladeing according to the Bills of lading for the same did amount to the
summe or value of four hundred thousand Crownes, and that her lading
was quick sylver, annis seeds coriander seeds, Currants Venise Glasses
and other rich Commodityes the quantityes of any whereof in certayne
or the values of them otherwise than as aforesayd this deponent cannot sett
fourth. And moreover saith he heard the sayd Chyrurgeon of the Saint Peter
say that the sayd shipp Saint Peter was with her ladeing bound
for Amsterdam; and saith that the greatest part of the Company of the
sayd shipp were dutchmen. And further hee cannot depose saveing that the harry
Bonadventure in the chase and fight wore the English Colours and the Saint Peter [?the] Dutch shipp the Holland Colours.

To the sixth he saith the sayd Captaine Swanly carryed back the sayd shipps the
harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter back to Messina a Citty subiect to the King of Spaine to repaire and make good
the hurt they had sustayned in the sayd fight, and to enable them to goe for Tunis [?all GUTTER]
which he knoweth goeing back in the sayd harry Bonadventure to Messina
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 7th he saith that the sayd Captaine Swanley did present the Governour
of Messina with a gift or present. and that the foremast of the prize being
putt a shoare there was taken or stoll[?o]ne away by some of the Inhabitants, and
Captaine Swanley forced to redeeme the same being deprived of two [?new] masts
which this deponent then and there heard he had provided for supply of
his sayd shipps. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 8th he saith that the sayd Captaine Swanley whilest the sayd shipps remained
att Messina sent John Merrick newly appointed Commander of the Saint Peter
and Lorenso Michaell Corporall of the harry Bonadventure being a
Spaniard
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.138r Annotate
Spaniard to provide some necessaries a shoare att Messina, which sayd Merrick
and sayd Spanish Corporall were by the Governor of Messina without any iust
cause that this deponent over heard detayned and kept in prison in Messina
for severall dayes during which their imprisonment this deponent did visit
them and saw them in hold, and knoweth that they came not aboard againe
till after the sayd shipps were putt out from Messina. And further
cannot depose.

To the ninth he saith that Captaine Swanley did hire at Messina before he
went first from thence videlicet before the taking of the Saint Peter, a ffelenca
with 7 or eight men to serve and attend the sayd shipp of warr, and saith
that after his returne into Messina with the Saint Peter the sayd ffelenca was
seized and detayned, and the men belonging to the same were kept and deteyned
by the sayd Governor, whereby the sayd Captaine Swanley was deprived of
meanes to gaine Intelligence. the premisses this deponent knoweth for
the reasons aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 10. 11. and 12th. he saith that the sayd Captaine Swanley on or about the
12:th day of June 1653 last past sett sayle with his sayd two shipps from
Messina and sayling along the Coasts of Scicily for Tunis the wind being
Crosse after 12 or 13 dayes sayleing espyed .7. dutch men of warr lyeing
under the Isles of Trapany which is a place subiect to the King of Spayne
and gott as neere the Castle of Trapany with both the sayd shipp as hee
durst for running them aground. which this deponent being then present
saw and observed. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .13. and 14.th he saith that after the arrivall of the Harry Bonadventure
att Trapanie and salutation given to the place, and notice being taken by the
sayd Towne and the Governor thereof that the sayd Harry Bonadventure
was a Mann of Warr of this Commonwealth, ?hee the sayd Governor sent
Capt Swanley word that he and his shipps should be protected, and that
the sayd Dutch shipps commended by Young Van Trump should not affront
or dammage the English in that port, And the Messenger that brought
the sayd message to Captaine Swanley went immediately to the sayd Trump who
was then makeing in for the sayd port, pretending he so went to hinder
the further approach of the sayd Dutch ffleet of 7. sayle of shipps aforesayd,
and withall telling the sayd Captaine Swanley and Companie that they might
att noe hand presume to make any shott there for that they were and should
be safe. But the premisses Notwithstanding the sayd dutch shipps soone after
the arrivall of the sayd messenger from the Governor att them entred the
moule or port and made up to the sayd Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter
and there seized and tooke both the sayd shipps and
their lading, by meanes whereof the sayd Van Trump and Companie of the
sayd dutch shipps became possessed of the sayd harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter lyeing under the ffort of Trapany as aforesd this
deponent being then present and taken prisoner aboard the Harry
Bonadventure in his owne quarter. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifteenth he saith there were some shott about the same tyme made
from the fforts of Trapanie, but whether any execution were thereby done
upon the dutch men, or their shipps or noe this deponent knoweth
not and otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.138v Annotate
To the .16.th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .17.th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 18:th he saith the sayd seizure and losse of the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter att Trapany as aforesd happened upon the 25th day of June
Last being Saturday, And upon the Monday next ensueing this deponent being
a prisoner aboard the vice Admirall of the Dutch Shipps saw two merchants
shipps belonging to the Dutch come safe out of the port of Trapany freely
and unmolested. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .19.th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 20th he saith the arlate shipp the harry Bonadventure was an able
strong shipp of the burthen of 300 tonnes and upwards; and had 41. gunnes
and a brasse mar?therers, and was well equipped and fitted with all
materialls weapons and munition fitting for a Man of warr of her
burthen, and was victualled for about 5 monthes for 100 men.
and had a great quantity of powder aboard the certainty whereof this
deponent knoweth not, and saith there were goods and tokens aboard
and severall goods and necessaries belonging to the sayd Captaine Swanley
and Companie of good value, And this deponent for his owne part had
aboard att the tyme of the sayd seizure upon his owne accompt in goods
Cloathes medicaments Instruments and other things to the cleare value
of one hundred thirty eight pounds eighteene shillings sterling, over and besides
his expences from Livorno to England amounting to the summe of
eleven pound seven shillings sterling, which sayd goods and expenses
are more particularly deduced in a schedule to the sayd allegaton annexed
drawne upp into the forme of an Affidavit, and exhibited into this Court
on the behalfe of this deponent. And he saith that he hath moreover
suffered dammage by meanes of the sayd seizure in his losse of tyme
the summe of 15 li sterl. And saith he knoweth not the value of the
sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure nor the value of other mens losses
therein. And further he cannot depose.

To the 21th he saith that the losse of the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter and their respective ladings was as he verily beleiveth
occasioned by the fraud contrivance and practise of the sayd Governors
of messina and Trapany or one of them, And beleiveth that in case
the sayd Captaine Swanley had bene supplyed with necessaries in due tyme
att Messina and had not bene there deprived of his ffelenca and men as aforesayd
or had bene protected by the Governor of TRapany aforesayd as
he might have bene, the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure and
Saint Peter had not bene taken by the dutch nor lost to the English
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true. And otherwise cannot
depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin.

John Standen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 24th day of September; Examined upon the sayd ?Allegation

5

William Clutterbuck of hackney in the County of Middlesex
Mariner Purser of the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure
aged three and twenty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and Examined. saith as followeth videlicet
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.139r Annotate
To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneths
January ffebruary and March 1652 and March Aprill May and June 1653 the
arlate shipp the harry Bonadventure was ymployed as a Mann of Warr against
the hollanders and others Enemyes of this Commonwealth by a lawfull Commission
under the Command of the sayd Captaine Swanly with Instructions from Mr
Charles Longland Agent of this Commonwealth Residing att Leghorne, And
saith in pursuance of the sayd ymployment about the 19th day of May
1653 Last past The sayd shipp sett out from Messina and in her Course
toward Tunnys off of the Cape Spertevento on or about the 22th day of May
aforesayd mett with two dutch shipps which made one or
two shott att the harry Bonadventure which ymmediately fired upon them
and fought with them and after a sharpe dispute for three  or four howres
subdued and tooke the bigger of them named the Saint Peter and her lading
and slew the master of her in the ffight, and the sayd Captaine Swanley
and Company tooke the Mariners of the Saint Peters Company or most of
them out of her into their owne shipp and so became absolute Masters and
Possessors of the Saint Peter and her Lading. All which This deponent knoweth
to be true being Purser of the harry Bonadventure in the sayd service
andpresent and actually engaged in the said ffight. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp the
Saint Peter was a large shipp of the burthen of betwixt4 or 5 hundred tonnes
and had 24 gunnes and rigging and furniture and munition fitting and
requisit, saving the dammage she receyved in ffight, and had her full lading
of rich goods and Commodityes her hold being full stowed and her gunn
deck halfe filled with goods, And saith her lading was Quicksylver
Rice Currants, Anniseeds, Glasses and other goods the certayne particulars
of which goods this deponent cannot sett forth. And saith he knoweth
not the certayne value of the sayd shippsLading, but beleiveth that the
value of the whole Cargazon according to the bills of lading for the
same might amount to the summe or value of two hundred thousand duckatts
or fifty thowsand pound stock. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that th
sayd shipp the Saint Peter and the other dutch shipp with he fought with and
against the harry Bonadventure by the space of four howres or thereabouts
and killed some of her Company and wounded others, and did their best
dendeavour to sinke and destroy her, And saith the harry Bonadventure
during the whole Chase and fight wore and had out the Colours of this Commonwealth
and the sayd dutch shipps wore and had out during all the sayd tyme the
holland Colours. All which he knoweth being Purser of the harry
Bonadventure and was present and saw and observed the premisses. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith he cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith that the foremast of the sayd prize shipp Saint Peter being
in the sayd fight so hurt that it would not beare sayle and the maine topmast
of the harry Bonadventure being lamed, and other hurt being done
to both the sayd shipps Captaine Swanley returned back with them both
to Messina and about the lateer end of May 1659 (sic) arrived there, and provided
himselfe of such mast and other necessaries as were Requisite to enable the
sayd shipps to proceed to Tanys aforesaid, which he knoweth for the Reasons aforesayd
and otherwise cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.139v Annotate
To the seventh he saith he heard the sayd Captaine Swanley say att Messina
that he sent that tyme a present in Gold, and a Case of glasses to the
Governor of Messina, and that the sauyd Governor did promise him all XXX
accomodations. But saith the sayd Governor and Jurats of Messina being
subiects of the King of Spaine the premisses notwithstanding would not
permitt the sayd Captaine Swanly to make use of the masts he had soe
provided a shoare but kept and deteyned the same from him. XXXX
this deponent knoweth for the resaons aforesayd and being then in the
port of Messina. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the eighth he saith that the master of the Saint Peter John Merrick and [?the GUTTER]
Corporall of the harry Bonadventure Lorenzo Michael a Spaniard [XXX GUTTER]
about the same tyme sent a shoare to provide some necessaries  [XXX GUTTER]
Governour and Jurats of the sayd Citty of Messina without any [XXX GUTTER]
given that this deponent ever knew or heard of cast into prison and
there detayned 10. or 12 dayes and were not released nor dismissed nor
came to the sayd shipps againe till they were gone out to sea from
Messina which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9th he saith that during the Stay of the sayd two shipps at Messina
the sayd Governour and Juratts seized a ffelensa and 6 or 7 men [?to the GUTTER]
same belonging, and kept and deteyned the same from Captaine
Swanly who had formerly hired the sayd ffelensa there to s[?erve ?her]
for monly pay att the rate of eighty ducketts per month, to [XXX GUTTER]
and attend upon the harry Bonadventure and to goe out upon all
occasions to gaine Intelligence for him; And saith the taking and
detayning of the sayd ffelensa and her men by the sayd Governour
and Juratts was much to the disservice of this Commonwealth, and [XX GUTTER]
occasion of the losse of the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter [?there GUTTER]
after ensued. which he knoweth being Purser of the harry
Bonadventure the tyme aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 10. 11. and 12th he saith that on or about the 13th day of June 1653
the sayd Captaine Swanley departed with his sayd two shipps to sea and
sayling along the Coasts of Scicily for Tunis after 12 dayes [?espied GUTTER]
off of Trapany amongst the Isles 7 sayle of dutch shipps and [XXX GUTTER]
more comeing under sayle from the Road of Trapany, and thereupo
for this preservation made in for Trapany a Port Towne subiect [?to GUTTER]
the sayd King of Spaine and scituat in the Isle of Scicilia whereon
Messina also standeth, and brought both the sayd shipps the harry
Bonadventure and Saint Peter to an anchor within pistoll shott of the
Castle of Trapany, this deponent being present and seeing and [?knoweing GUTTER]
the premisses to be true. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 13th he saith that ymediately upon the arrivall of the sayd two shipps
att Trapany the sayd Captaine Swanley, John Merrick and Lorenzo Michaell
went a shoare to the Governour of Trapanie, and att their returne to the
shipboard did acquaint this deponent and others of the shipps Companie
that they had bene with the sayd Governour to know if he would [?protect GUTTER]
them in the sayd Port againts the sayd dutch shipps, and that the sayd
Governour had promised them and their shipps protection according to [XX GUTTER]
Request and deman. And othewise cannot depose.

[?To GUTTER]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.140r Annotate
To the fourteenth he saith that the sayd 2 shipps came and arrived att Trapany
as aforesayd about eleven of the Clock in the day tyme upon the 25th day
of June 1653, and about two howres after the sayd Dutch shipps
Commanded by young Van Trump followeing upon the sayd harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter made their approaches eere the sayd Port., and this deponent
then saw a boat passe to and fro betwixt Van Trump and Trapanie
and about the same tyme there came to the sayd 2 shipps a Messenger in a
boat from the sayd Governour and warned the sayd Captaine Swanly and his
Company not to show any incivility in the sayd Port by shooting; And saith
that soone after, the premisses notwithstanding, the sayd Van Trump entred
the Port with his shipps and with two of them boarded the harry Bonadventure, and so seized
and tooke boththe sayd shipps and became possessed thereof and their lading  they then
lyeing within postoll shott of the fforts of Trapanie as aforesayd, this
deponent being then present and taken in the harry Bonadventure and
afterwards kept and deteyned prisoner aboard one of the sayd dutch shipps. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifteenth he saith that to colour the matter att such tyme as the sayd
seizure was actually made some gunnes were discharged from the  fforts of
Trapanie, but noe manner of execution was done upon any of the sayd dutch
shipps, the sayd shotts being made att random and quite over the shipps
of the sight and observation of this deponent being then and there present
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 16 and 17th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 18th he saith that being prisoner aboard the little Saint Marke one
of the sayd Dutch shipps lyeing neere to Trapany
he this deponent saw two or three dutch shippes come the next day after the
sayd seizure safe and unmolested out from the road of Trapanie. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the 19th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 20th he saith the Harry Bonadventure was of the burthen of 350 tonnes
and was well provided of all necessaries for a mann of warr of her
burthen and had 41 gunnes, and a good quantity of powder and shott
and had severall goods and necessaries aboard belonging to the sayd Captaine
Swanley and Companie and some tokens. And this deponent for his owne part had
in the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure by the dutch Clothes bookes and
other goods of the ckeare value of 13 l. .10 s sterling for his owne proper Accompt
and moreocer expended in his Journey home from Leghorne by land the
summe of 7 l. 2 s.. 4 d. sterling, of which sayd goods Cloathes and expenses
he this deponent hath left a Particular in the Registry of this Court
And saith he knoweth not the value of the sayd shipp nor of the losses
of other men in the same. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 21th he saith that the losse of the sayd two shipps the harry Bondaventure
and Saint Peter and their lading happened and was occasioned by the [?fraud]
injurious practises and contrivances of the sayd Governours of Messina
and Trapany, which he beleiveth for the reasons predeposed wherto
he referreth himselfe. And otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke/
and Doctor Godolphin./

William Clutterbucke. [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.140v Annotate
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

6.

John Merrick of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Mariner late Leiuetenant of the Harry Bonadventure
and afterwards Master or Commander of the Saint Peter
a foresayd, aged one and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposed and saith
as followeth.

To the first arle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that from the moneth
od December 1652 and intill the 25th day of June 1653 last past
the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure was imployed in the service of
this Commonwealth by the directions of Mr Longland Agent for the Commonwealth
now Resident att Leghorne, with Commission and Instructions to seize
and Take Dutch shipps, and other shipps belonging to the Enemyes of
this Commonwealth, and saith the sayd shipp under the Command of Captaine
Robert Swanley did proceed upon the sayd designe and expedition, this
deponent being Leifetenant of her for the most part of the said tyme
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith That on or about the 19th day of May 1653 the sayd
shipp Harry Bonadeventure under the Command and for the service aforesd
sett sayle from Messina in Scicily and being bound for Tunnis by order
of the sayd Agent Mr Longland did in her Course, off of the Cape [SpXXXX GUTTER]
meet with two dutch shipps, which assaulted the Harry Bonadventure
whereupon a fight was begann, which continued about the space of four
howres, till att last after some dammage done to the Harry Bonadventure
in her sailes rigging masts and hull and killing of some of her Company
and wounding of others, the bigger of the sayd dutch shipps the Saint Peter
aforesayd was subdued and taken, and the master of her slayne in the
fight, and most part of her Companie taken out of her into the sayd
Harry Bonadventure, by meanes whereof the sayd captaine Swanly and
his Company became masters and absolute possessors of the sayd
shipp Saint Peter and all her lading. The premisses he knoweth being present
in the sayd fight and att the sayd seizure. And otherise cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith the Saint Peter was of the burthen of 400 tonnes or thereabouts
and had 24 gunnes, and two brasse [?bases], and was well rigged and perfect
in all respects with tackle furniture victualls munition and other requisits
fitt for the sea saving the dammage she sustayned in fight, and was full laden and
she could well beare with rich Commodityes, Quicksylver, Rice, Annise seeds,
Currants, venice glasses and silke and other goods, the [?portions] or
quantityes fof all or any of which goods and merchandizes this deponent
cannot sett forth, nor doth he know what the value of the sayd shipp and
Cargozon of goods did or might amount unto. And further cannot depose.

To the .4. he saith that from the beginning of the first Chase to the end of [?the GUTTER]
sayd fight the Harry Bonadventure had out and wore the Colour of this
Commonwealth and the sayd 2 dutch shipps the Saint Peter and the other had out
and wore the Holland Colours. And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposicon
he cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith that after the sayd seizure he this deponent heard [?some GUTTER]
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.141r Annotate
of the Company of the Saint Peter say and confesse some in the Englishe tongue
and others in dutch but to the understanding of this deponent that the
sayd shipp Saint Peter and her lading were bound for Amsterdam, and were there
to make their discharge. And this deponent saith that he found severall
bills of lading aboard the sayd shipp Saint Peter, and delivered them to the
sayd Captaine Swanley who p:rsently after the perusing of them told this
deponent that according to the entryes in the sayd bills of lading all the
goods therein mentioned were consigned for Amsterdam. And further he cannot
depose.

To the .6th. he saith that upon the taking of the sayd shipp Saint Peter, which
happened about the 22th day of May 1653 the sayd shipp being much
disabled, and the Harry Bonadventure hurt in fight the sayd Captaine Swanly
appoynted this deponent Master of the prize. and returned with both the
sayd shipps to Messina a foresayd a Citty in Scicily under the dominion
of the sayd King of Spaine, arriving there about the 25th day of
May, and there fitted and provided a new foremast for the Saint Peter
and a new maintopmast for the Harry Bonadventure and other necessaryes
to enable the sayd shipps to proceed to tunnis aforesayd which  this deponent
knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .7th and 8th he saith the Governour of the sayd place and Officers of the sayd
Citty of Messina did hinder and would not permitt the sayd Captaine
Swanley and this deponent to make use of and bring  aboard the sayd
masts provided and fitted ashoare as aforesayd notwithstanding that
the sayd Governour upon Captaines Swanleyes sending to him a present of good
value in gold and venise glasses had promised him all fitting a[?tt] [?occasions]
whereupon this deponent taking a Broker an Inhabitant of Messina with
him went a shoare to buy and procure such timber as might serve to make
good the old masts, And saith that both himselfe and the sayd broker were
by the Magistrates of Messina putt in prison and there detayned for twelve
dayes, And saith that not long after this deponent was seized and layd in
hold as aforesayd the Corporall of the Harry Bonadventure being a Spaniard
and goeing to the sayd Governour to make way for this deponents release
was likewise by the officers of the sayd Governour seized on and brought
and putt into the same prison where this deponent was, being one of the
worst prisons in the sayd Citty, And saith that during the tyme of their
such ymprisonment severall pilotts of Messina were clapt into the dungeon
of the same prison and Irons putt upon them by authority of the Magistrates
of Messina to drive or force them to confesse or declare that the sayd
Captaine Swanley and Companie had landed some goods contrary to the rules
and rders of that place that there by they might find occasion to detayne
and confiscat the sayd prize shipp the Saint Peter and her lading, as the
sayd Pilotts themselves did declare to this deponent. And saith that he
this deponent and the sayd Spanish Corporall Lorenzo Michael and the broker
aforesayd were so putt and deteyned in prison without anie offence given
or cause showne that ever this deponent heard of, and after 12 dayes the
sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter being departed from
Messina were without cause shewne or any examination taken [?dismissed]
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.141v Annotate
and released not withstanding that in that space of tyme two dayes had
past whereon by the report of other prisoners this deponent understood
that the Judges or Maystrates there had usually come to the sayd prison
for the examination of prisoners. All which this deponent knoweth for
the reasons aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose.

To the ninth he saith that before such tyme as this deponent was layd in prison
as aforesayd the sayd Governour and Inhabitants of Messina furnished the Dutchmen
lately of the Saint Peters Companie with severall boates to meet with a Dutch shipp the
Lyon expected daily from Smyrna or another
Dutch shipp named the Diamond expected frpm Alexandria to give them
of the Lyon and Diamond intelligence of the sayd English Mann of warr
being att Messina and to mann them the better in case they mett with
eyther of the sayd Dutch shipps, and somuch this deponent heard from severall
Inhabitants of Messina and himselfe saw the sayd boates goe off from
Messina with the sayd dutch men lately taken in the Saint Peter. And further
saith the sayd Governour and officers of Messina did about the same tyme
seize and detayne a ffalensa and men belonging to the same being
about nyne in number, which the sayd Captaine Swanley had formerly
hired to attend him for the gaining of Intelligence and other service
att the rate of 80 dollars per month or thereabouts And saith that the
seizing and deteyning of the sayd ffalensa and her Company was an
occasion of the losse of the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter that did
afterwards ensue. And this deponent further saith that after himselfe
and the sayd Corporall and Broker were sett att Liberty he hired a ffalensa
to carry himselfe and the sayd Corporall to Captaine Swanleys sayd shipps
then out att sea, but was not permitted to goe in her by reason of a prohibition
from the sayd Governour and his officers, but was forst to make use of
an old boat formerly belonging to another prize shipp that Captaine Swanley
had brought into that Port, and therein together with the sayd Corporall
to make shift to gaine and overtake the sayd harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter being gone to sea a day or two before. And further
he cannot depose.

To the 10. 11. and 12 he saith that the sayd harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter did
depart from Messina about the 12th of June last past and sayled along
the Coast of Scicilia towards Tunis and after 13 dayes and on or about
the 29th day of the sayd month of June the sayd Captaine SWanley this deponent
and the rest of the sayd shipps Companie espyed in or under the Isles of
Trapany 7 dutsch shipps and [X] dutch shipps m[?ore] in the Road of Trapany
under sayle, and thereupon for preservation of them selves and shipps putt
into the sayd Port of Trapany which is a Port Towne of Scicilia and
subiect to the King of Spaine and came to anchor with both their sayd
shipps as nere [?ground] as they durst and with in pistoll shott of the Castle[?s GUTTER]
of Trapany which this deponent knoweth being then present and master
of the Saint Peter and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith that the sayd ducth shipps being att that tyme [XXXX GUTTER]
of the sayd 2 shipps, The sayd Captaine Swanley, this Deponent and the aforesayd
Corporall a Spaniard ymediately upon their arrivall att Trapany being
about eleven of the Clock of the say upon the sayd 25th of June, and before
the sayd Dutch shipps which were under the Command of young Van Trump
[XXX GUTTER]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.142r Annotate
did enter the Port; went a shoare and addressed themselves to the Governour of
Trapanie to request and desire his protection of them and their shipps against
the sayd Trump and his dutch shipps, and the sayd Governour promised them
protection accordingly. And further he cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith That after the returne of this deponent the sayd Captaine
Swanley and the sayd Corporall a shipboard there came a Messenger from
the sayd Governour in a boat and acquainted the sayd Captaine Swanley and
this deponent that he was goeing to Van Trump to charge him from the
sayd Governour not to make any disturbance in that Port, and the sayd
Messenger went ymmediately to the sayd Dutch shipps and after some stay
there returned with one in his boat belonging to the sayd Dutch shipps
and arrived with him at Trapany. And saith that soone after another
Messenger came to the sayd Captaine Swanley and this deponent from the sayd
Governour warning them and their Companie upon paine of death not to shoot, for that they
were in the King of Spaines Port and were and should be safe and
s[XXXX], or to that effect, And saith that the premisses notwithstanding the
sayd Van Trump came upp with his sayd Dutch shipps immediately
upon the returne of his owne Messenger from TRapany which was about
2 of the Clock after noone of the sayd 25th of June into
the sayd Port, and with 2 shipps Clappt aboard the Saint Peter, and with
four of his sayd shipps Clappt aboard the harry Bonadventure and thereby
became master of them and tooke and surprized them and their lading
within pistoll shott of the Castle of Trapanie. This deponent being then
present and aboard the Saint Peter att the tyme of seizure and saw and
well observed the sayd passages. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .15th he saith he saw one of the sayd Dutch men of warr lye aground
att or about the sayd tyme of seizure , and knoweth that some shott was made
from the Castle or forts of Trapanie but without any execution done upon
the Dutch shipps or any of them, and colourably only as this deponent
beleiveth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .16th. he saith he knoweth not to depose.

To the 17th and 18th he saith there were of the sight of this deponent who made
shift to escape out of the hands of the dutch the merchants shipps
that lay [?losse] and unmolested in the sayd Port of Trapany after the
seizure aforesayd was past and over. And otherwise cannot depose saving
the sayd Van Trump att his goeing off from TRapanie saluted the
Towne with severall gunnes and struck his flagg of the sight of
this Deponent, who saw Trumpes men att their foeing off [XXXX XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXX GUTTER]
[XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX]

To the 19th, he saith he heard it comonly talked and discoursed of in TRapany
by the Inhabitants thereof after the sayd seizure, that the sayd Governour
had betrayed the sayd 2 shipps to Van Trump for money. and further hee
cannot depose.

To the 20th he saith the harry Bonadventure was of the burthen of 400
tonnes or thereabouts, and was a Competent Strong shipp fitted with all
manner of tackle weapons and munition for a Mann of warr and had
41 gunnes, and a great quantity of powder and shott; and had some
merchants
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.142v Annotate
merchants goods aboard of good value in tokens and otherwise, and severall
goods Cloathes and necessaries belonging to the sayd Captaine Swanley and
his Companie, and  this deponent for his owne part had goods Clothes
and other things in the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure and Saint
Peter att the tyme of the sayd seizure by the dutch but most of them aboard the
harry Bonadventure, and all for his owne Accompt to the cleare
value of three hundred and thirty four pounds fourteene shillings six
pence sterling. and lost besides by the sayd seizure in expences of travel[?l]
home for England and losse of tyme to the value of 55 l sterling. And
saith he cannot depose of the value of the sayd shipp the harry
Bonadventure nor the losse of others therein. But for his owne [?XXXX]
hath left in the Registry of this Court a particular or schedule [?wherein]
the same are more distinctly declared. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .21th. he saith and verily beleiveth that the fraud and [?XXXX]
of the saud two Governours of Messina and Trapany was the occasion
of the losse of the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter
And beleiveth that in case the Governour of Messina had permitted Captaine
Swanley to furnish himselfe inn due tyme with necessaryes there, the
sayd Captaine Swanley and this deponent had wholly escaped the sayd Dutch
shipps, And that in case the Governour of Trapany according to his
promisses had used his best endeavour to protect them, and had not
prohibited the English to defend themselves, the sayd shipps harry
Bonadventure and Saint Peter with their respective lading had not
bene so taken by the Dutch nor lost to the English. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

Repeated before Doctor Godolphin
and Doctor Clarke./

John Merricke [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 26th of September 1653.

Examined upon the said allegation.

.7.

Richard Hall of Ratcliffe in the County of Middlesex
Mariner, Quartermaster of the sayd shipp the Harry
Bonadventure aged five and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5th Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that in the monthes of may and June last past and for some monthes before
the sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure was ymployed in the service of the
Commonwealth, and in pursuance of the sayd service about the month of May
last past sett forth from Messina in Scicily and in her Course to T[?unis]
wearing the Colours of this Commonwealth mett with off of the Cape Sp[?XXXX]
two shipps dutch built wearing the holland Colours and chased them, and
that the sayd dutch shipps fired upon the harry Bonadventure, and fought
with her, and saith that one of the sayd shipps named the Saint Peter was
subdued and taken, and the master of her slayne, and the greatest part of her
Company
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.143r Annotate
Company taken out of her, and thereby Captaine Swanley Commander of the
harry Bonadventure became possessed of her the Saint Peter, and her lading. And saith the
Saint Peter was of the burthen of 350 tonnes and upwards and was full laden with
rich commodities Quick sylver Rice, Currants Anniseeds Venice glasses and
other goods, and was worth with her lading by the report of some of her
Company speaking broken English the summe of one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds sterling, And saith he heard diverse of her Company say and declare that
she the Saint Peter was a dutch shipp, and that she was bound for Amsterdam and
that she was there to discharge her lading for the Accompt of Merchants
Inhabitants of Amsterdam. All which this deponent knoweth being Quartermaster
of the harry Bonadventure, and being present att and seeing and hearing
the passages aforesayd as he hath now declared. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 6. 7. 8. and 9th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith. that the sayd shipps
the harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter being both hurt in the sayd ffight the
arlate Captaine Swanley returned back againe with them to Messina and
there provided two masts for them, but was not permitted to make use of them
by the Governour and Magistrates of Messina Citty under Command of the King of Spaine and saith that John Merrick
the master of the prize the Saint Peter, and Lorenzo Michell a Spaniard
Corporall of the harry Bonadventure were by the sayd Governour
and Magistrates seized upon in Messina and detained prisoners four
or five dayes as this deponent remembreth. And further saith that
the sayd Governour and Magistrates did likewise seize and deteyne a
ffalensa and Company to her belonging which the sayd Captaine Swanley
had hired to attend his Mann of warr, for the gaining of Intelligence
and other service, and saith the seizure and detention of the sayd ffelensa and her men
was very much to the preiudice of the sayd Captaine Swanley and his Company and
to the disservice of the Commonwealth. All which this deponent knoweth being
Quarter master of the harry Bonadventure and present with her att Messina
when the premisses happened. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 10th. 11th 12th and 13th hee saith that the sayd Captaine Swanley about the 11th or 12th
day of June last departed from Messina with his sayd shipps the harry
Bonadventure and Saint Peter, and sayling along the Coasts of Scicily espied
upon the 25th day of June last past in the morning amongst or under the Isles of Trapany .7. sayle of ducth men of warr
and three dutch merchants shipps in the road of Trapany, and thereupon for his
security from the sayd Dutch shipps putt into Trapany, and anchored both
the sayd shipps harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter within pistoll shott of
the Castle of Trapany. And saith that ymmediately thereupon he the sayd
Captaine Swanley John Merrick and lorenzo Michall the Spaniard went ashoare
into Trapany, and att their returne declared to this deponent and others of
the sayd shipps Company, that they had bene with the Governour of Trapanie
and that he had promised them and their sayd shipps protection against the sayd
dutch shipps, which this deponent knoweth being then present aboard the
harry Bonadventure in the sayd Port of Trapany. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the 14. 15. 16. 17. and 18th he saith that after the premisses this deponent
saw and observed some boates to passe to and fro betweene Trapany and the sayd
Dutch shipps which were Commanded by young Van Trump. And saith the
sayd Governour of Trapany sent a Messenger to the sayd Captaine Swanley requiring
him
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.143v Annotate
him and his Companye not to shoot gunn musquett or pistoll in that
port for that it being a Port of the King of Spaine the saud English
shipps were and should be there safe and secure and saith that the premisses
notwithstanding the sayd Dutch shippes under Command of the sayd Van Trump
came upp into the sayd Port of Trapany and boarded the Saint Peter with [?XXX]
shipps, and the Henry Bonadventure with foure, and so the dutch became [?possessors]
of them both and their lading respectively. And saith that to colour the
busines severall shotts were made from the Castle and fforts of Trapany
most of them with powder onely and all without execution upon the sayd
dutch shipps. And moreover saith that the sayd Van Trump of the
sight of this deponent att his goeing off from Trapany shott severall
gunnes and struck his flagg, and saith that a day after the sayd
seizure two dutch shipps laden with salt of the sight of this deponent
remayned in the sayd Port of Trapany quiet and unmolested. And
further he cannot depose.

To the 19 article of the sauyd allegation this deponent saith that after the tyme of
the seizure of the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter by the sayd [?dutch]
shippe as hee hath now deposed, videlicet in the month of July 1652 last
past being att Leghorne in the Company of the Corporall of the sayd
Van Trumps one shipp; He this deponent heard the sayd Corporall
then and there say that the sayd Van Trump gave and payd to the
Governor of Trapany aforesayd the summe of two thousand pistolls
in Gold for the sayd Governous good will to suffer him the sayd
Van Trump to enter the sayd Port of TRapany with his shipps
and make seizure of the sayd shipps the Harry
Bonadventure and Saint Peter. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 20th he saith that the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure was
of the burthen of 340 tonnes and upwards, and had 41 gunnes and [?XX]
brasse bases, and was victualled at the tyme of her seizure for 6 monthes
for 100 men, and had aboard her a great quantity of powder and that
part whereof was for the use of the Phenix, Bosse and Warwick
frigotts or some other shipps of Captaine Badilyes Squadron, And saith
she was an able strong shipp and furnished compleately with all things
requisite as well tackle as weapons and munition of warr for a
warlike expedition, and had aboard 62 baggs of Annieseeds, 7 [?Chests]
of glasses, and one Chest of the weight of halfe a tonne of beades
which said Anniseeds glasses and beades were taken out of the
gunn deck of the sayd prize shipp the Saint Peter. And saith she had
aboard her moreover severall goods and necessaries belonging to the
sayd Captaine Swanley and Company, And this deponent for his owne
part had att the tyme of the sayd seizure goods bought by this deponent
at Smirna, and Clothes to the cleare value of forty nine pounds
ten shillings sterling. And saith that he lost moreover in his Journey
homewards from Livorno by land and expenses in his sayd Journey
ten pounds sterling, and in losse of tyme 4 li sterling. And saith he knoweth
not the value of the sayd shipp nor of the goods and losses of other men
therein. And otherwise he cannot depose, saving he leaveth in the Registry of [?this]
Court a particular of his owne losses which particular he saith was and is true.

To the 21th he saith that he verily beleiveth that the losse of the sayd [?XXXX]
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.144r Annotate
the Harry  Bonadventure and Saint Peter and their lading happened and
was [?occasioned] by the fr[XXX] contrivance and iniurious practises of the sayd
Governour of Trapanye, and might, if he had not promised protection and
unworthily broken his promise therein, have bene [?preserved] to the English
and had not come as he verily beleiveth
into the possession of the Detch as they did, and as this deponent hath above sett forth
And otherwise he cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin./

the marke or firme
of the said Richard 'RH' hall. [MARKE, RH SIDE]

----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd Allegation.

[?8]

Richard Clayton of Blackwall in the County of Middlesex
Mariner, late Cooke of the sayd shipp the Harry
Bonadventure, aged five and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnesse sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4 and 5th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
shipp the harry Bonadventure was in the monethes of May and June last past and before
imployed by the Order of mr Longland Agent att Leghorne in the immediate
Service of the Commonwealth against the Enemyes thereof under the Command
of Captaine Robert Swanly. and in pursuance of the sayd ymployment sett
out from Messina a Port or Citty under the dominion of the King of Spaine
in the sayd month of May, and after having bene att sea three or four dayes
neere the Cap[?a] Spartovento mett with two Dutch shipps, which made severall
shotts upon the harry Bonadventure; whereupon the sayd shipp harry
Bonadventure fought with the sayd Dutch shipps and after three howres [XXXXX]
and tooke one of them named the Saint Peter, and slew the master of her in fight
and dispossed the Companie thereof, so as the sayd Captaine Swanly and Company
became absolutely possest of the Saint Peter and her Ladeing. And moreover saith
the sayd shipp Saint Peter was of the burthen of betwixt 4. and 5. hundred tonnes
and was full laden with rich goods, as quick sylver, rice, Anniseeds, venise
glasses, and other goods the particulars whereof This deponent cannot sett forth
nor the certaine value thereof; but beleiveth the sayd shipp and lading were worth the
summe of one hundred thowsand pounds sterling. And further saith that the sayd
shipp the harry Bonadventure did att the tyme of the Chase and seizure weare
the Colours of the Commonwealth, and the sayd shipp Saint Peter and the other dutch
shipp wore the Holland Colours, and saith he heard severall of the Company of the
Saint Peter after the sayd seizure sayd and declare that the sayd shipp Saint Peter was
bound to Amsterdam and was there to discharge her lading. the premisses this
deponent knoweth being Cooke of the harry Bonadventure and att the tyme of
the sayd fight and seizure, and being then aboard her, and seing and hearing
the passages above declared. And further he cannot depose.

To the 6. 7. 8. and 9th he saith that after the sayd fight and seizure the sayd Captaine
Swanley returned with both the sayd shipps back agiane to Messina to repaire the
hurts the sayd shipps had sustained in fight, and provided there two masts for them
but could not gett them aboard, being hindred by the Magistrates of Messina
and saith that the Governour and Magistrates of Messina did seize and deteyne
a ffa[?lensa] belonging to Captaine Swanly and imprisoned John Merick Master
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.144v Annotate
of the Saint Peter and Lorenzo Michael a Spaniard, Corporall of the Harry
Bonadventure, and kept them in prison a fortnight or there abouts. by
meanes of which injurious dealing of the sayd Governor and Magistrates of
Messina the service of this Commonwealth receyved great preiudice. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 10th 11th and 12th he saith that after the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter were sett out to sea from Messina and about Midsommer day last past, the tyme hee
otherwise remembreth not the sayd Captaine Swanly espying .7. dutch men
of warr and 3 dutch marchants men off of Trapany, for preserving the
sayd shipps putt into Trapany a place subiect to the sayd King of Spaine and
brought both his sayd shipps to an anchor within pistoll shott of the
Castle of Trapanie, which this deponent knoweth being then present and
aboard the Harry Bonadventure. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 13.th he saith and deposeth. that the sayd dutch shippes under the
Commande of the arlate young Van Trump, followeing the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter toward the Port of Trapany, the sayd Captaine Swanley went
a shoare and tooke with him Lorenzo Michael the sayd Spanish Corporall
and sent him to speake with the Governour of Trapany to request his [?XXX]
and protecttion against the sayd Dutch shipps, And this deponent heard
the sayd Corporall att his Returne say and declare that the sayd Governour
had undertaken to protect and preserve the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter, against the dutch, and that the English should not [?XXX]
shoot or make any disturbance in that Port. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 14.th he saith that before such tyme as the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter came to an anchor in the Port of Trapany He this deponent
saw and observed some boates to passe to and fro betwixt Van Trump
and Trapany, and saith he heard the sayd Corporall of the Harry Bonadventure
call Captaine Swanley that the sayd Governour of Trapany had sent [?speciall]
Order that the sayd Captaine and Company should not under paine of death
shoot somuch as a pistoll in the sayd Port, for that they were safe [?XXX]
And saith that the premisses notwithstanding the sayd Van Trump
entred the Port of Trapany with his men of warr, and with two
shipps Clappt aboard the Saint Peter, and with five shipps Clappt aboard
the Harry Bonadventure lying as aforesayd within pistoll shot of
the Castle of Trapany, And thereby became possessed of the sayd shippes
the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter, and their respective lading which
this deponent knoweth being Cooke of the Harry Bonadventure and
taken prisoner in her the tyme predeposed, videlicet upon or about [?MXXXX]
day last past the tyme otherwise he remembreth not. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the fifteenth he saith that to colour the matter there were att the
tyme of the sayd seizure severall shott made from the Castle and [?fort]
of Trapany which by the sound or report thereof, and for that [?XXXXX]
execution att all was to be made with powder onely and without bulletts
and somuch was then likewise taken notice of by others of the Company
of the Harry Bonadventure. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.145r Annotate
To the .16th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 17th he saith that att such tyme as the Governour of Trapanies ffelensa
or boat arrived att van Tramps shipp about an howre before the seizure aforesayd
hee this deponent observed that the sayd van Tramp struck his flagg and
shott .4. or .5. gunnes and ymmediately made upp into the Port to make the
seizure as aforesayd. And saith that after the seizure when he departed from
the sayd Port, hee the sayd van Tr[?u]mp saluted the Governour and Towne of
Trapany with severall gunnes and further he cannot depose.

To the 18th he saith he cannot depose

To the .19th he saith and deposeth that being taken prisoner att Trapany as
aforesayd, he this deponent was first putt and deteyned aboard the little
Saint Marke one of the sayd Dutch men of warr, and being there aboard and
in Companye with the Purser thereof he heard him the sayd Purser say in
the English tonhue, that himselfe the sayd Purser in the behalfe of and
by order from the sayd Van Trump had payd and delivered to the Governour
of Trapanie fifteene hundred duckatts as a gift or present for leave
and permission for the sayd dutch shipps to enter the sayd Port and there
to surprize and take the sayd 2 shipps the Harry Bonadventure and
Saint Peter with their lading from the English. And further saith that not
long after he this deponent was removed out of the Little Saint Marke into
the Admirall commannded by the sayd Van Trump, and there heard severall
scotchmen Irishme, and dutchmen speaking the English tongue say and
affirme that the sayd Van Trump did send the sayd Governour of Trapany
fifteene or sixteene hundred duckatts by the hands of the Purser of the little
Saint Marke for liberty to make the seizure aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the 20th he saith The sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure was of the burthen
of 350 tonnes or thereabouts and was an able strong shipp and compleatly
in all respects fitted for a Mann of warr with 42 gunnes and 6 monethes
provisions for 100 men, and great store of powder and bullet and
weapons and munition of all sorts requisit and had in her about 63 baggs
of anniseeds which had bene taken out of the gunn deck of the Saint Peter
and allso severall goods and necessaries belonging to the sayd Captaine
Swanly and Companie of good value. And this deponent for his owne
part and upon his owne Accompt had goods and Clothes in the sayd shipp att the
tyme of seizure of the cleare value of twenty pounds sixteene shillings
sterling; and expended in his Journey from Leghorne to England the
summe of .5li 14 s sterling according to a schedule of the sayd goods and
expences annexed to the sayd allegation, over and besides his losse of tyme
amounting to 4 li. 10 s sterling. And saith he knoweth not the value of the
sayd shipp, nor the losses that others sustayned by the sayd seizure. And
othrwise cannot depose.

To the 21th he saith that the losse of the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter and their lading was occasioned by the fraud and injurious
practises of the sayd Governour of Trapany, as this deponent beleiveth
for the reasons aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctor Clarke/
and Doctor Godolphin./.

Richard 'R' Claton
his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.145v Annotate
The 27th of September 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

9

Robert Swanley of Hackney in the County of
Middlesex Mariner late Captaine or Commander of the
sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure, aged eight and
thirty yeares or thereabouts, a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
monethes of december January ffebruary and March 1652 and in
March Aprill May and June 1653 last past thesayd shipp the Harry
Bonadventure was imployed to sea in the immediat service of this Commonwealth
under the Command of him this deponent with a lawfull Commission and
Instructions to surprize and take as a Man of Warr all ffrench shipps
and dutch shippes belonging to any port or places of the united Provinces
and all other shipps belonging to any the knowne Enemies of this Commonwealth
And the sayd shipp did proceed accordingly under the Command of this
deponent upon the sayd expedition. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the second article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that on or about
the nyneteenth day of May 1653, The sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure
by Letter from Mr Longland Agent for this Commonwealth at Leghorne sett
sayle from Messina towards Tunnis and in her course thither upon [?or ?about]
the 22th day of Mary 1653 off of the Cape Spertevento mett with two dutch
shipps, which assaulted the Harry Bonadventure, and made 2 or three
shotts at her. Whereupon this deponent and his Company in persuance of
the aforesayd Commission and Instructions, fought with the saud two dutch
shipps and after three or four howres subdued and tooke the stronger
of the sayd dutch shipps named the Saint Peter whereof Claes Symondson
Cohone was Commander, which sayd Claes Symondson was slayne in the
sayd fight, and the Company of the Saint Peter or greatest part of them
taken in the Harry Bonadventure, by meanes whereof This deponent
and his Company became absolute Masters and Possessors of the sayd shipp
the Saint Peter and her Lading/ And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith That the arlate shipp
the Saint Peter was of the burthen of betwixt 4 and 5 hundred tonnes and
had 24 gunnes about 24 lb weight a peice one with another and had
in her 35 barrells of powder and was well fitted with Anchors Cable
and other tackle and with armes and munition requisit and was [?furnished]
and richly laden in her diverse sorts of goods, and saith according to
the bills of lading found aboard the sayd shipp and perused by this deponent
there was Laden aboard the sayd shipp two Chests of quicksylver [?XXX]
of [?Rice], 8 or 9 hundred baggs of Anniseeds fennell seeds and [?Cummin seeds]
about 100 tonnes of Currants, about 1600 weight of ffustick, and [?XX]
butts of Almonds, and allso severall Chests of drinking glasses and
lookeing glasses, and a large Chest of balsome beades, and a [?XX]
of silke and other goods, And this deponent saith that accordingly [?the]
quantityes of goods in the sayd bills of lading mentioned and entred in the
sayd Cargazon of goods were well worth the summe of fifty [?XX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.146r Annotate
'W. W.'

pounds sterling, and beleiveth that in case the same had come in safety to
this Port of London they would have yeilded the summe of four score thousand
pounds sterling. And further he cannot depose.

To the fourtha rticle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the said ships the
Saint Peter and the other dutch shipp in Company with her fought with and
against the harry Bonadventure by the space of three of four howres
and did their utmost endeavour to sinke and destroy her, and killed some
of her men and wounded others. And saith that att the beginning of
the Chase and fight the harry Bonadventure wore the Colours of this
Commonwealth, and the Saint Peter and the sayd other dutch shipp wore the
holland Colours of the sight and observation of this deponent. And further
he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith he heard the Steersman and Chyrurgeon of the
said shipp the Saint Peter after the tyme of seizure say and declare that
the aforesayd goods were all taken into the Saint Peter att Venice, and that
she with her Lading was bound for Amsterdam and was there to deliver her
Lading, And somuch likewise appeared by the bill of lading for the
sayd goods, seene and perused by this deponent, in which bills all the
sayd goods and Lading were consigned to Merchants of Amsterdam.
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith That upon the taking of the sayd shipp Saint Peter she
having receyved hurt in her masts and rigging, and the Harry
Bonadventure having likewise susteyned some hurt in the sayd fight
he this deponent and his Company returned with both the sayd shipps
to Messina and there arrived on or about the 25th day of May 1653.
And saith that he this deponent there bought provided and fitted a shoare
by his owne Carpenters a foremast for the Saint Peter, and a maine topmast
for the harry Bondaventure, with other necessaries requisit to enable
the sayd shipps to proceed to Tunnys aforesayd. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the seventh he saith That this deponent uppon his arrivall att Messina
being a Citty under the dominions of the King of Spaine, having there
released, all the dutch prisoners late of the Company of the Saint Peter, three
onely excepted, the Governor and Inhabitants of Messina did furnishe
the sayd Dutch men so released with ?ffeloncas and sent them to sea to meet
with two dutch shipps the Lyon comeing from Smyrna richly laden with
silkes, and the Diamond comeing from Alexandria; And further saith
that the sayd Governor and Magistrates of Messina understanding that the sayd
two dutch shipps were bound therewith or for the ?Barre of Messina, and to hinder this deponent as he
verily beleiveth from attempting any thing against them to the great
dissXXXX of this Commonwealth refused to suffer this deponent or his Company
to fetch from the shoare the two masts by him provided as aforesayd, and allso
threatned this deponent to sinke his shipps if he should offer to weigh anchor
and moreover tooke away the old foremast of the Saint Peter being carryed
a shoare to mend, by which meanes and other injurious practises of them
the sayd Governor Magistrates and Inhabitants of Messina, this deponent
was there deteyned neere a fortnight longer than he might or should have
stayed in case he had bene accomodated with necessaries for his moneyes
according to the promise of the sayd Governo:r to whom this deponent p:rsented
a Chest of Venice glasses and fifty ?Chequeenes of Gold, in all to
value
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.146v Annotate
value of .150. Crownes for his favour in that behalfe. And saith that whilst
this deponent was so deteyned att Messina the sayd shipp the Lyon having
by meanes of the sayd Governor and his contrivance gayned in intelligents
of this deponents lyeing there with his shipp of warr gott safe into Amsterdam
this deponent afterwards understood as well by letters from thence as by
some of the Dutch themselves formerly dismist by this deponent, and
sent, from Messina to meet with the Lyon as aforesayd. And further
he cannot depose.

To the eighth and nynth he saith that in order to the further preiudice of of this
deponent and to the disservice of this Commonwealth the sayd Governor and
Magistrates of Messina tooke and imprisoned John Merrick master of the
Saint Peter and Lorenzo Michell a Spaniard Corporall of the Harry
Bonadventure and deteyned them in priosn till this deponent had made
shift to gett out to sea with his said shippes. And moreover saith that
they the sayd Governor and Magistrates of Messina to hinder this deponent
from gaining intelligence seized upon, his ffelensa and Companie XX
belonging, and halled the sayd ffelensa a shoare, and imprisoned th
Company thereof, and suffered them not to returne to this deponent to
serve in the ymployment wherein he had hired them and the said ffelensa
at sparate of 80 dollars p month. and saith that to prevent this deponent
getting out from Messina and to entrapp him and his sayd shipps XXX
sayd Governor and Magistrates did seize and imprison severall pilotts
belonging to the sayd port of Messina, and used them with ?Severity to
force them to confesse that this deponent had Landed goods contrary to
the rules of that port, and soemuch this deponent was given to understand
from his freinds in Messina, who advised this deponent to use his best
diligence to gett both his shipps out of that port, advising withall that
the sayd Governor and Magistrates had forced the said pilotts to confess
that this deponent had landed the Chests of quicksylver, in order to
bring this deponent and his sayd shipps especially the prize shipp in ?danger
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the tenth he saith that hereupon, and the Pilotts of Messina not daring
to conduct this deponents sayd shipps out of that port, he att an extraordinary
price hired a Bandito to pilott his sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter from Messina, upon or about the 12th day of June 1653
last past, And being out att sea gott sayle and carryed the sayd shipps
alonst the Coasts of Scicilia intending to reach Tunnys (sic) as soone as ?was
possible according to the sayd Mr Longlands former Order, still in force and
continued, howebit he saith the winds being contrary he could not
steere to the Southward of the ?Barre of Messina, but was forces to beare XX
the Northwards alongst the Coasts of Scicily as afored. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the eleventh he saith that the sayd shippes the Harry Bonadventure and Saint
Peter after 12 or 13 dayes being att sea, the winds crosse, and sayling along
the Coasts of Scicily, This deponent and his Company espied off of Trapany
under the Isles there 7 dutch shipps, which afterwards proved to be XX
XXX
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.147r Annotate
Men of Warr under the Command of Young Van Trump, and three Sayle more
of dutch shipps comeing out of Trapanie. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 12th he saith that upon eight of the sayd dutch shipps he this deponent with
the advise of his officers resolved that the best meanes they could take for
the preservation of themselves and their syd shipps was to putt into the
port of Trapanie being a port or place scituat in the sayd isle of Scicily
and subiect to the sayd King of Spaine. And accordingly this deponent
did putt in there, and anchored both the sayd shipps the Harry Bonadventure
and Saint Peter within pistoll shott of the ffort or Castle of Trapanye. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 13th he saith that the sayd dutch shippes followeing upon the Harry
Bonadventure and Saint Peter, before the sayd dutch shipps entred the sayd
port, This deponent John Merick master of the Saint Peter, and the sayd
Lorenzo Michael a Spaniard went to the Governor of Trapany and made
knowne to him their condition and requested his favour and protection of
them and their sayd shipps against the dutch shipps., And the sayd Governor
did thereupon promise protection accordingly saying that this deponent and
his sayd shipps being in the Chamber and under the standard of
his master the King of Spaine were and should be safe and secure
or spake words to the selfe same effect and purpose in the presence and hearing
and to the understanding of this deponent, and moreover sayd that
he would send a messenger to the sayd Van Trump to forbidd him
to enter that Port or there to disturbe this deponent and his
sayd shipps. And otherwise he cannot depose saving he saith that sending his sayd Corporall
Lorenzo a second tyme to the Governor aforesd, he the said Governor promissed protection as before but withall
XXXX XXX that he expected a XXXX two ships XX XXX which this deponent promised him accordingly

To the .14.th he saith that ymediately thereupn the sayd Van Trumps shipps
being about halfe a mile off of the harbour the sayd Governor of Trapany
sent a Messenger in a ffolensa to the sayd Van Trump who after his arrivall
there and some short stay returned back to Trapany the Curtaine of the
ffolensa being drawne, for the hiding or concealing of Van Trumps Messenger therein
as this deponent conceyveth. And he saith that upon the returne of the
Governors sayd ffelensa from the dutch shipps the sayd van Trump shott severall
gunnes by way of salutation And more over saith that soone after the returne of the sayd
ddalensa to Trapany, the aforesayd Governo:r sent a Messenger to this
deponent with expresse command upon paine of death not to make any shott
or permitt any to be made in that port; And saith that soone after the
premisses the sayd ffolensa of the Governor went off againe from Trapany
sith the sayd Van Trumps Messenger in her, passing neere this deponents
shipp, And ymmediately upon the arrival of the sayd Messenger att
Vantrump, the sayd dutch men of warr made upp into the port and
two of the sayd dutch men of warr clapped aboard the prise Saint Peter, and
four of the sayd dutch men of warr clapped aboard the Harry Bonadventure
and thereby the Company of the sayd dutch shipps possessed themselves of
both the sayd shippes the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter and their
lading, within pistoll shot of the sayd ffort of Trapany. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .15.th he saith that after the sayd seizure was actually made some shott were
made from Trapany but without any execution att all upon the dutch shipps
and to relat the matter onely as this deponent beleiveth And otherwise he
cannot depose saving that one of the sayd Dutchman of Warr was and lay aground
att Trapany neere an howre after the sayd seizure and unmolested.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.147v Annotate
To the 16th he saith he cannot depose

To the 17th he saith that when the sayd Van Trump had surprized both the sayd
shipps the Harry Bonadventure and Saint Peter as aforesayd, att his goeing
off with them the dutchmen aboard their men of Warr and Souldiers in the
sayd Castle of Trepany by way of mutuall salutation and reioyes XX waved
sayd Capps or hatts att each other and Van Trump saluted the Towne
with severall gunnes and struck his flagg three tymes, all which this
deponent saw and observed. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 18th he saith and deposeth that aafter the sayd Van Trump was gone away
with the sayd stwo shipps there remayned in the port of Trapany two
dutch merchants shipps till the next day after, and that noe restraint
was made of them, nor any and deavours used by the sayd Towne or Governor
to remedy the English, And more over saith that the sayd dutch shippes
remayned 2 dayes next after the seizure neere to the sayd Towne
of Trapany (and under the Command of the Castle as this deponent beleiveth
and did so remaine all together unmolested. And further saith that the
sayd Governor of Trapany refused to furnish this deponent with ffatuXXX
wherein he might to send to Van Trump to endeavour the retXXse of such
of his shipps Company as were detayned prisoners aboard the sayd dutch
shipps. And further he cannot depose.

To the 19th he saith that after the sayd seizure was made, he this deponent saw
and observed divers of the Inhabitants of Trapany that tooke notice of
the passages aforesayd to shake their heads, and say that the Governor had
sould the English for money, and this deponent goeing to the Governor
aforesayd and taxing him of his injurious dealeing in this business and
threatning to make complaint thereof observed in his Countenance
and by his trembling that he was guilty of betraying the sayd
shippes to the Dutch for moneyes, And this deponent hath heard
that Vantrump did for the same purpose p:rsent or give him a
bribe of 1500 ducketts or some other considerable summe. And further
he cannot depose.

To the 20th he saith that the sayd shipp the Harry Bonadventure was of the
burthen of four hundred tonnes and upwards, and was compleatly fitted
with Rigging Anchors Cables masts yards and other tackles requisit and
was victualled for 6 monethes for about 140 men. and had aboard her 41
gunnes. 2 brasse buses, and 2 Iron murtherers, and all requisitts fitting
thereunto, and had aboard her 142 kintalls of powder att the least, and
shott, musketts, Carbenes pistolls hatchetts, and other weapons and munitions
proportionable and fitt for a man of Warr of her burthen, and had
aboard her likewise about 63 baggs of Anniseeds and other things which
were taken out of the gunn deck of the Saint Peter. and had moreover merchants
goods aboard in tokens and goods taken aboard her att Smyrna to a great value
and allso severall goods Clothes plate moneyes and necessaries belonging
to this deponent and mariners of the sayd shipps Company. And particularly
Thomas Cunstable Gunner of the sayd shipp and slayne att the tyme of surprizall
in Trapany had aboard her att the tyme of the sayd seizure for his own accompt
several peices of [?Mokartre], Dimmitees, silke stockings Clothes and other things
which were as this deponent beleiveth of the cleare value of forty
pounds sterling. And Edward Lyn masters mate of the sayd shipp slayn
likewise att the tyme of the sayd surprizall had then goods and Cloathes aboard
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.148r Annotate
for his owne use and Accompt of the Cleare value of twenty pounds Sterling.
And further saith that the sayd shipp the harry Bonadventure with her tackle
and furniture gunnes armes and munition, plate and money on bord her att
the tyme of seizure  together with merchant goods aboard her in tokens
and the goods and merchandizes of this deponent and his shipps Company aboard
her together with the value of her fredome for Zant did amount unto
and were of the cleeare value together allso with this deponents and
others of the shipps Company Journeys home for England, of the summe of
fourteen thousand pounds sterling, And saith that the dammage in the sayd
shipp the harry Bonadventure cannot be made good for a lesse summe
Over and besides the dishonour and disservice done by the sayd seizure to
this Commonwealth which this deponent is not able to value. And further
he cannot depose.

To the 21th he saith. That the losse of the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure
and allso of the sayd shipp the Saint Peter and all their respective Ladings
was occasioned by the fraud Contrivance violence and injurious practises
of the sayd Governors of Messina and Trapany . And saith he verily
beleiveth that in case he this deponent had not bene abused and wronged
att Messina as hee was nor had had his ffalenca and men there taken from
him and deteyned as they were, Or in case the sayd Governor of
TRapany had not betrayed him as he did, or had protected him this deponent
and his shipps as he might, and ought to have done according to his
promise and the freindshipp betwixt this Commonwealth and his master
the King of Spayne, the sayd shipps the harry Bonadventure and
the sayd prize the Saint Peter and their respective Ladings might and
?should have bene, as they were, taken by the dutch nor lost to the
English. And otherwise he cannot depose./

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Mr Cocke)

Robt Swanleij [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 28th of September 1653.

Emanuel da Croiz against a certaine shipp)
called the Dorsett, and heretofore sometymes)
called the Robert, and before that called the)
Saint Jacob of Duinkerk. ffranklyn Smith)
pfwhich shipp Martin Williams is Captaine)
and Master.  ffrancklin Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Emanuel da Croze.

1.

Martin Williams of duinkerke in
fflanders Mariner aged two and forty
yeares or thereabouts, a witness sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that in the
monthes of November and december 1652 and for some tyme
before and continually since the sayd Emanuel da Croize was and is and
so ought to be the lawfull Owner and Proprietor of the sayd shipp now
called the dorsett, but here to fore called the Robert, and before that the
Saint Jacob of duinquerqe, and for such the sayd Emanuel da Croiz for all
the tyme aforesayd was and is commonly accompted reputed and taken, the
premisses
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.148v Annotate
premisses this deponent knoweth to be true being master Captaine or
Commander of the sayd shipp. and further he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that he this
deponent being Captaine or Master of the sayd ship now called the Dorset
but formerly called the Saint Jacob of Dunquerke did about the middle of
the month of November 1652 sett sayle with the sayd shipp from
Dunkirke and upon the 17th day of December or neere about that tyme
did arrive with the said shipp and Companie thereof att Cowes in the Isle
of Wight. And saith that he this deponent and his shippes Company were
then in the true and actuall possession of the sayd shipp as Captaine and
Mariners thereof for and on the behalfe of the sayd Emanuel de
Croiz And otherwise cannot depose

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp in
controversy now called the Dorsett att the tyme when she so came into the
sayd Port of the Cowes and for some tyme after was called and knowne
by the name of the Saint Jacob of Dunquerke; And saith the sayd shipp so
called the Saint Jacob of Dunquerque, and the shipp now called the Dorset
and which some tyme before her being called the Dorset was called
the Robert was and is one and the same shipp and not diverse, which
this deponent knoweth being the Captaine or master of her And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd shipp before
she came to Cowes did belong to Dunkirque and came from thence in November
1652 And this deponent was then Master or Captaine of her and was [?XXXX]
appoynted so to be by the sayd Emanuel de Croiz the owner thereof And
accordingly this deponent hath bene and is and ought to be the Captaine
Master or Commander of the sayd shipp. And further he cannot depose.

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he had
knowne the arlate shipp the Dorset formerly called the Saint Jacob of
Dunkirke from the tyme of her first building att Duinkerke and he
hath knowne most of the voyages that ever she made and never [?knew]
or heard that she was in the Port of Cowes before the sayd moneth
of December 1652, and saith he never saw the arlate James Taswell
before his arrivall att Cowes, And saith since his arrivall there he
heard the sayd James Taswell say that he never saw a more hansome
built shipp than the sayd shipp now called the Dorset, but then called the
Saint Jacob of Dunkerke, for all which reasons this deponenent verily
beleiveth that the sayd James Taswell never saw the sayd shipp
before her arrivall att Cowes in the sayd moneth of December 1652 And
further he cannot depose

To the .6th he saith that when the sayd shipp came into the port of Cowes
as aforesayd which was in the moneth of December 1652 and
continually since the sayd Emanuel de Croiz had and hath the Lawfull and
true possession of the sayd shipp. And this deponent for all the sayd tyme
was and continued the Captaine and Commander of her, and as Captaine
and Commander of her had the possession of her for the use of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.149r Annotate
sayd Emanuel de Croiz really and actually till about ten weekes agoe
that the sayd James Taswell gott the possession thereof by force and
violence. And fruther he cannot depose

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith he doth not know
or ever heard that the sayd Emanuel de Croiz or any for him or by his
order did make any sale or transport of the sayd shipp unto the sayd James Taswell, nor
did the sayd James Taswell or any for him ever pay any money att
all or any other consieration for the same unto the sayd Emanuel de
Croiz that this deponent ever heard knoweth or beleiveth, And otherwise
saving his depositions to the three next subsequent aArticles he cannot
depose

To the eighth articel of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that all the right or title so farr as this deponent ever heard which the
sayd James Taswell did or doth pretend to the sayd shipp was and is
by colour of a Bill of sale pretended to be made thereof to him by this
deponent, And this deponent hath severall tymes heard the sayd Taswell
confesse and affirme that he hath not any title [?or] to the sayd shipp
but by the sayd pretended Bill of sale onely. And otherwise cannot depose

To the nynth and tenth he saith that he this deponent never had any
power direction or Authority from the sayd Emanuel de Croiz to make
any bill of ale of or for the sayd shipp. Howbeit This deponent
saith that after his Arivall att Cowes as aforesayd videlicet within
three or four dayes as he now remembreth the tyme, the sayd James
Taswell takeing a phancy and good likeing of the sayd shipp as he
pretended, treated with this deponent to ymploy the sayd shipp as a
private Man of warr in the service of this Commonwealth in the name
of him the sayd James Taswell as ymployer of her, he the sayd
James Taswell then having as he sayd, a Commission graunted
him by warrant from the right honourable the Councell of State for the
setting forth of a private Mann of warr: And this deponent
saith that after treaty, he did accept of the sayd Taswells proposalls
and did agree to serve for him with his shipp as a private man of
warr upon termes and conditions that the sayd Taswell finding victuall and provisions should have one third part of this deponent and Company [?mXXX] 3d part And saith the better
to accommodat the sayd James Taswell in this ymployment he did
att the earnest request and sollicitation of the sayd James Taswell
make signe and seale a Bill of sale for the sayd shipp, from
which tyme the sayd shipp formerly called and knowne by the
name of the Saint Jacob of Dunkirke was called by the name of
the Robert, the reason whereof was for that the Commission which
the sayd Taswell had obtained as aforesayd went for a shipp called the Robert
And saith whereas in the sayd Commission mention was made of another
Captaine, the sayd James Taswell with a knife scraped out the name
of the other captaine written therein, and with his owne hand rerote this
deponents
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.149v Annotate
deponents names in the place and stead thereof. And he saith that the
sayd Bill of sale of and for the sayd shipp made signed and sealed
by this deponent as aforesayd was made and done without any money
for the sayd shipp, or any other valwable consideration, and was
and is colourable and not reall nor intended or meant by
him this deponent to be of any forme or vertue, otherwise then
as aforesayd to accomodat the sayd Taswell in order to his sayd Commission
which sayd colourable bill of sale this deponentw as the rather induced
to make att the desire of him the sayd Taswell, because the sayd
Taswell did pretend that in regard the sayd shipp was a fforeigners
and was according to Agreement with him to be sett out as a Mann
of Warr against the Enemyes of this Commonwealth there might
some dammage come to the sayd shipp upon some penall law unlesse
a Bill of sale were made thereof unto him the sayd Taswell
or to that effect. And moreover This deponent saith, That about
the tyme of sealing the sayd bill of sale as aforesayd there
was with the consent of the sayd Taswell and in the sight and
presence of this deponent, one Mr Desham, Mr Symon [?aschwXXX]
and another whose name this deponent remembreth not, a subscription
or writng made under the sayd Bill of Sale and upon the [?same]
paper wherein the bill of sale was written, In which subscription
or underwriting was exprest that the sayd Bill of sale was
colourable, and that thej sayd Taswell was to take noe benefit or
advantage thereby in relation to the property of the sayd shipp or
other interest therein of like nature, or to the same effect. And
saith that the sayd Taswell in truth had not nor hath nor ought to
have any right or title to the sayd shipp by vertue of the sayd
bill of sale, And saith that the aforesayd subscription [?XXXX]
writing thereof is cutt off as this deponent beleiveth by the fraud of
him the sayd James Taswell , and on purpose to conceale the
truth and to Clayme the sayd shipp by the sayd colourable bill of
sale. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the said
James Taswell about 2 monethes agoe tooke and gott by force
the possession of the sayd shipp the Dorset formerly called the [?XXX]
and first of all called the Saint James of Dunquerque, and dispossed
the arlate Emannuel de Croys thereof. And the manner of taking
the saud violent and forcible possession as this deponent hath himselfe
heard and beleiveth was by the assistance of a Mann of warre
as is arlate, he this deponent being a shoare when the sayd forcible
possession was taken, and the sayd Emannel de Croiz dispossessed as
aforesayd. And saith the sayd violent possessionw as taken before the
Arrest of the sayd shipp made by the Authority of this Court And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.150r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories.

Smith dt.

To the first he saith he comes to be a witnes and to testify the truth in
this cause att the Request of the sayd Emanuel de Croiz, and saith he never
had nor hath any share or part in the sayd shipp nor any part thereof
And otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose

To the second he saith he is a Roman Catholique.

To the third he saith that he this deponent came Captaine or Commander
of the sayd ship from Duinkerke. and otherwise negatively

To the fourth he saith he hath knowne the Interrate Emanuel de Croiz for
theis fifteene yeares last past or therabouts and he saith the sayd
Emanuel de Croys was in the possession of the sayd shipp before this
deponent became Commander of her and was commonly accounted and reputed
the sole Owner of her att Dunkirke whither she did belong, and he appoynted
this Rendent Commander of her/ and this deponent never heard of any
othr Owner thereof, and for theis reasons doth beleive that thesayd Emanuel
de Vroiz was and is the sole Owner of the same. And oterwise he cannot
depose.

To the fifth he saith that the Bill of sale annexed
to the sayd Interrogatories is the Colourable Bill of sale whereof he hath predeposed and is
subscribed by this Rendents hand and was colourably made and delivered by this Rendent
to the sayd James Taswell. And otherwise cannot depose

To the sixth he saith that upon about the 21th day of December
1652 the sayd James Taswell did deale and deliver unto him this
deponent a bond under his hand and seale to pay him this deponent the
summe of 300 li upon the 20th day of July then next ensueing, and
this deponent lately had the sayd bond in his possession, and the same is
now as he beleiveth in the hands of Mr ffrancklin one of the Proctors
of this Court, And further saith that the sayd bond was not made in consideration
of the sale of the sayd shipp, but to secure this deponent against the sayd
James Tasewell that he the sayd Tasewell should not take any advantage
against this deponent by vertue of the sayd colourable Bill of sale

To the seventh he saith and deposeth that the sayd shipp the Dorset, sometymes
called the Robert, and forerly the Saint Jacob of Dunkerke hath bene
ymployed for six monthes past and upwards in the service of this
Commonwealth against the enemyes thereof by vertue of a Commission
under the Conduct and Command of this deponent, And he saith that the
sayd James Taswell and one Thomas Powles did victuall the sayd shipp
during all the tyme she was in the sayd service, And saith that Emanuel
de Croys did not in all that tyme expend and ;ay out anything either
in victualls or mens wages; And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the eighth he saith that att the tyme of the Arrest made upon the sayd
shipp by Emanuel de Croys the sayd shipp ws in the possession of the
Governor of Cowes Castle. And saith that att that tyme there was aboard
her eleven barrells of stinking beere, one barrell of beefe, and about
800 of bread, all of the provisions of the sayd Taswell, but he saith there
was not aboard her eyther munition or victuall fitt for any voyage
att sea. And saith there was onely two men then aboard
her putt into her by the Governor of the sayd Castle.
And further otherwise
than negatively he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.150v Annotate
To the nynth and tenth he saith that he this Rendent with the sayd shipp
by vertue of Commissions which the sayd James Taswell obtained
hath taken five prizes, but how many of them the
sayd Taswell hath gott condemned this Rendent knoweth not for
that contrary to his contract and Agreement he the said Taswell
hath refused to come to Accompt with tis Rendent for the same
And further he cannot depose, saving he saith two of the sayd
prizes were taken by thee sayd shipp under the name of the
Robert, by vertue of the sayd Taswells Commission of which he
hath predeposed, and three of the sayd prizes were taken by the
sayd shipp under the name of the Dorset by vertue of another
Commission obtained by him the sayd James Taswell. And further
he cannot depose. saving he beleiveth that the paper annexed to the bill of sale [?XX]
the paper cutt off therefrom as aforesayd.

Martiy Cuillama [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 30th day of September 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Witnes

[##] [LH MARGIN] John Lisle of Cowes in the Isle of Wight gentleman)
and Notary Publique aged 34 yeares or thereabouts)
a witnes sworne and examined saith as followeth)

To the first Article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith he cannot depose

To the second third fourth and fifth articles of the sayd alleagtion this deponent
saith and deposeth that he hath knowne the arlate shipp the Dorset formerly
called the Robert for about nyne monethes last past. And saith that the
sayd shipp about the latter end of December last arrived att Cowes
in the Isle of Wight under the conduct of the arlate Martin Williams
and Companie, and was att her such Arrivall called and knowne by the
name of the Saint Jacob of Dunkerke, and then came as the sayd Williams
and Company sayd ymediaetly from Dunkerke. The premisses he knoweth
being an Inhabitant of Cowes and observeing and knoweing the
premisses to be true, and otherwise cannot depose saving that
the saud Martin Williams from the tyme of the first comeing of
the sayd shipp to Cowes till about August last continued in the
quiet possession of the sayd shipp as Captaine or Commander thereof.

To the sixth seventh eighth nynth and tenth articles of the sayd allegation
This deponent saith that the sayd Martin Williams being in the
quiet possession of the sayd shipp till about August last past, and
the aforesayd James Taswell about that tyme having taken a [?XXXX]
possession thereof the Governor of Cowes Castle for the preservation
of the peace took the sayd shipp into his possession till the [?XXX]
should appeare, and demannding of the sayd James Taswell being
come before him what right or title he the sayd Taswell had to the sayd shipp
he thereupon in the sight and presence of this deponent and [?others]
produced a Bill of sale for the same written as then [?seemeth]
to this deponent with the handwriting of him the sayd Taswell
and signed by Martin Williams aforesayd, And saith that as then
it seemed to this deponent there had bene Cutt off from the sayd
bill of sale att the foot thereof and under the seale some writing
the contents whereof this deponent knoweth not, but observing the
tops of some letters uncutt off did then and stil beleive that
[?there]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.151r Annotate
there was some writing cutt away as aforesayd. And saith he hath heard
Thomas Symons a schoolmaster of Cowes whose hand is sett to the sayd
Bill of sale as a witnes say and affirme that the sayd Bill of sale
was and is colourable, And otherwise saving his subsequent depositions
he cannot depose.

To the eleaventh article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the said James Taswell about the moneth of August last past
and before the arrest of the sayd shipp att the suit of [?XXXXXX] did by
force and by the assistance of the old Warwick frigott Captaine Godfrey
Commannder take possession of the sayd shipp the Dorset sometymes
called the Robert and before that the Saint Jacob of Dunquerke
and dispossed the sayd Emanuel de Croys, and the saud Captaine Williams
seeing the sayd violent possession taken and made, as aforesayd. And
further he cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first he saith he cometh to be a witnes in this cause att the Request
of the producent and his Proctor. And otherwise negatively

To the second he saith he is not a Roman Catholique.

To the third he saith he hath heard and beleiveth that Captaine Williams
interrate brought the sayd shipp from Dunkerke in fflanders, and otherwise
negatively.

To the 4th he saith he hath knowne the Interrate Emanuel de Croys since
July last past. And further cannot depose.

To the 5th he saith he hath heard aswell by Captaine Williams as others att
Cowes that the sayd Captaine Williams did marke a colourable bill of sale
of the sayd shipp to the foresayd James Taswell, and verily beleiveth
that the bill of sale now shewne him was and is the very Bill of sale
which the sayd James Taswell produced for his title to the sayd shipp
before the Governor of Cowes Castle as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the .6th he saith he hath credibly heard that the sayd james Taswell
did seale and deliver a colourable bond for the payent of 300 li
to the sayd martin Williams. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .7. he saith that for six monethes and upwards the sayd shipp was
ymployed as a private Mann of Warr against the Enemyes of this Common=
wealth first by the name of the Robert. an dafterwards by the name
of the Dorsett. And this deponent hat heard that the sayd James
Taswell and one Powles did victuall the sayd shipp, and in consideration
thereof were to have one third part of the proffitts of the prizes that
should be taken, and the sayd shipp, Captaine Williams and Company
were to have two third parts of such proffitts. And otherwise he cannot
depose

To the eighth he saith the sayd shipp was att the tyme of the Arrest interrate
in the possession of the Governor of Cowes Castle, and not in the possession of
the sayd Taswell. and saith she had in her att the same tyme about
500
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.151v Annotate
500 of bread one barrell of butter about halfe a barrell of stinking beef
and some beare, but there was not sufficient provisions aboard for any voyage
att sea and saith there was then two men in her which were putt in
by the Governor aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the .9.th he saith that the sayd Captaine Williams hath with the sayd shipp
by vertue of severall Commissions obteyned by the sayd James Taswell
taken four or five prizes.

To the .10.th he saith he never saw the peice of paper annexed to the sayd bill
of sale before this tyme, but by the handwriting of the sayd Thomas
Symons who wrote the same as this deponent beleiveth being well acquainted
with his manner of writing, and by the name of the sayd Thomas
Syoms putt aswell att the foot of the sayd paper as of the Bill of sale
it selfe, this deponent beleiveth the sayd paper and writing thereon
to be the very paper and writing cutt off from the Bill of sale as aforesayd
And otherwise cannot depose

John Lysele [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before
the three Judges.
----
The fourth day of October [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT]

The Clayme of Lewis du Boyes, Adrian Yonker,)
and other merchants of Hamburgh for)
the ship the Neptune whereof Martin Holst)
is Captaine, and of George Scrothering)
John Scrothering and others merchants of)
Hamburgh for their goods in the sayd shipp)
taken by Captaine [Trenchfeild]. Smith.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd Claymers

.1.

Martin Holst of Hamburgh Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Neptune, aged
three and thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that in
the monethes of March Aprill May June July and August last past [?165X]
and for severall yeares before the arlate Lewis du Boyes, Adrian
Yonker and other merchants of Hamburrow were and att this present are
and ought to be the true and Lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp the Neptune
and of her tackle furniture and apparrell, and for and as such were
and are Commonly accounted reputed and taken, the premisses he knoweth
being master of the sayd shipp, and otherwise saving his following
depositions he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that in the
sayd monethes of March Aprill May June July and August 1653 the
arlate John Scrothering, and George Scrothering and other Merchants
all Hamburghers were and att this present are and ought to be the [?true]
Owners and Proprietors of the oyles Almons and all and singular
other the goods and lading of the sayd shipp the Neptune and [?soemuch]
which he knoweth being master of the sayd shipp, and signed bills of
lading for the sayd goods all for the Accompt of the sayd Hamburghers
and otherwise saving his subsequent depositions he cannot depose

To the 3d. he saith that in or about the monethes of March and Aprill
aforesayd, the arlate Joachim Lawrence and David Zollicoffer, and Thomas
van
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.152r Annotate
Van [?Beuer] and Respanian [?Cokel] did att Marseilles lade and putt on board the sayd shipp the
Neptune all the sayd Oyles Almonds and other Goods for the onely use and
Accompt of the sayd John Scrothering and George Scrothering and
other Merchants of Hamburgh, to be carryed  from thence to Hamburgh
and there to be delivered unto the sayd John and George Scrothering
and other Hamburghers for their use and Accompt, And saith that so much
the sayd factors who laded the same did att the tyme of ladeing the same
signify and declare unto this deponent the Master of the sayd shipp, and some of the
sayd shipps Company att Marseilles att the tyme of the lading thereof
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth he saith and deposeth that the sayd Joachim Lorenz and
David Zollicoffer, and Thomas van Beuer and Raspanian Coke[?r] were and are the factors of
the aforesaid Hamburow merchants, which this deponent knoweth for that
the sayd Hamburgh Merchants within theis three yeares last past have for
their owne Accompt sent to them the sayd factors severall quantityes of
goods and merchandizes of goods value, some whereof this deponent
himselfe hath carryed and delivered to the factors for the Accompt of the
Producents, And saith that for ans as factors of and for the producents
the sayd Jochim Lorenz and David Zollicoffer, and van Beuer and Raspanian Cokel were and are commonly accomted
reported and taken. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the fifth article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that the
sayd Joachim Lorenz and David Zollicoffer were and are by common repute
Switzers borne, and the sayd Van Beuer was and is by Common repute
a German borne and Respanian Cokel of Antwerpe and saith all the sayd persons are Bachelors and reside
att Marseillis as merchants Strangers and for such are accounted, and were
not nor are not ffrench men nor subiects of the ffrench King nor so accounted
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the goods afresayd
were to be transported directly to Hamburrow, and there should all have bene
delivered in case they had not bene taken by Captaine Trenchfeild, and saith
that noe part thereof was to have bene carryed to Amstrdam, neyther was the
sayd shipp to have touched there. the premisses he knoweth being master
of the sayd shipp, and otherwise saving his preceding depositions cannot depose.

To the seventh he saith he cannot depose otherwise than he hath deposed.

To the eighth article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that all the Owners
of the sayd shipp the Neptune and her ladeing aforesayd were and are
Natives of Hamburgh and so accounted and were and are merchants of
good quality using and driveing a trade to Marseilles, and saith they
were and are all of them merchants and Inhabitants of Hamburgh
and there have their howses and familyes. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the ninth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about
January last past being at marseilles hee received a letter from one of the
Owners of the sayd shipp the Neptune wherein expresse Order was given
to this deponent requiring him not to receive on board the sayd shipp any
Goods wares or Merchandizes for Amsterdam or other port of the United
Provinces, or to the like effect. And otherwise he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.152v Annotate
To the tenth article of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith that att such
tyme as the sayd shipp the Neptune was and remained at Marseillis
It ws there publiquely spoken and reported that the sayd shipp and
ladeing were directly to goe for Hamburgh. And otherwise he
cannot depose

To the 11th article of the sayd Allegation he saith and deposeth that there was a boy
a Passenger aboard the sayd shipp that was to be carryed to Hamburgh
and the sayd Boy was never told by this deponent nor any of his shipps
Company for ought this deponent knoweth that the sayd shipp was bound to
Amsterdam but was told that the sayd shipp was bound for Hamburgh, as indeed
she was. and for the letter allegat he knoweth nothing thereof, but saith
that all the writings which were in this deponents Custody are in the Registry
of this Court as he beleiveth.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. he saith

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp .7. yeares, from the tyme of her
first building and saith she was built at Lubeck by the order and direction
of this deponent att the Costs of himselfe and other the Owners thereof
whose names hereafter follow.

To the .3. hee saith that Albert Bearnes, Adrian Joncker and this Rendent
were and are Owners severally of one eighth parts of the sayd shippe
And Gryst Boremaster, Grete Burmaster, ffrancis Sloyer, Lewis du Boyes
Roches Stubbe were and are Owners severally of
one .16.th part of the sayd shipp and Christian Holst was and is Owner of
2 eighth parts and 1 sixteenth part of the sayd shipp, And saith the said
Owners were all Natives of Hamburgh and there doe live and have lived
all their tymes respectively.

To the .4. he saith the sayd shipp cost the aforesayd Owners in the building
and furnishing thereof thirteene thowsand and five hundred Rix dollars
or thereabouts, and this deponent payd all the sayd moneyes with his
owne hands for the building and furnishing thereof, And this deponent
for the sole use and proper Accompt of the sayd Owners about 7 yeares
agoe the tyme otherwise he remembreth, had and tooke the possession of
the sayd shipp. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith the sayd Proprietors have not for ought this Rendent
knoweth or hath heard sold their Propriety in the sayd shipp nor any of
them. And saith the aforesayd Owners did contribut to the setting forth
and furnishing the sayd shipp to sea the last voyage.

To the .6. he saith he knoweth all the Owners of the goods and lading aboard
the sayd shipp and knoweth them all to be natives and Inhabitants of Hamburgh
all their tymes. And saith that the names of so many of them as [?for ?XXX]
he remembreth were and are, John and George Scrothering, Jan Baptista [?Youncker]
Adrian Jonker, Paul Langerman, Michael Engles, Cornelius de [?XXX]
Michael Huys, [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] da Hartough, and John Jacob [?HEvenar].

To the .7. he saith he hath knowne Jochim Lorenz and David Zollicoffer Thomas
Van Beuer and Repanian Cokel att Marseilles about 4 yeares. and saith by common repute the
sayd Zollicoffers are natives of Saint Gallen in Switzerland, and the sayd
Beuer of ffrankfort upon the Rhyne or some place not farr from thence
upon the sayd River. And otherwise he cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.153r Annotate
To the .8. he saith the sayd Zollicoffers and Van Beuer and Respanian Cokel were severall tymes
in Companie with this deponent att Marcelles and aboard the shipp Neptune
whilst she remayned there.

To the .9. he saith he saw many of the sayd goods now claymed in the possession
of the sayd Zollicoffers in their house att Marseilles, and saw a goods part
of the Almonds bought and paid for to merchants of Marselles, and the
sayd factors did severall tymes tell this Rendent that the sayd goods and lading
were the goods of the Claymers, and this deponent knoweth that they were
all Laden for the Accompt of the sayd Hamburghers the Claymers thereof
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .10th he saith he saw the sayd Zollicoffers abd Van Beuer bring the
goods and merchandizes now Claymed aboard the sayd shipp att Marselles
and saith they were and are factors for the aforesayd Hamburgh merchants.

To the .11th. he saith there were severall bills of lading signed for the
merchants goods aboard the sayd shipp now claymed, which are of severall
tenors but the certaine number thereof he knoweth not, but saith he this deponent
firmed three of every distinct tenor. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 12th he saith that he verily beleiveth that the sayd ffactors had severall
effects in their hands of goods value for the Accompt if the aforesayd
merchants of Hamburgh. and this Rendent in the sayd shipp did about
three yeares agoe for the Accompt of the sayd John and George Scothering
transport from Hamburgh severall quantityes of Tyn lead and other goods
and delivered the same to the sayd ffactors att Marselles; And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith the factors interrate did acquaint this Rendent att Marcelles
for whose Accompt they did lade the severall and respective parcells of goods
by them respectively laden aboard the sayd shipp the Neptune, and who was
to beare the adventure thereof, videlicet the aforesayd Hamburgh merchants.

To the .14th he saith he doth not know nor is convinced or beleiveth in conscience
that the sayd shipp and goods now claymed or any part thereof doth belong
to any Hollander or other subiect of the States of the United Provinces
or to any ffrenchman subiect of the ffrench King, And saith the sayd shipp
the Neptune was not bound for Amsterdam or any other port in Holland, nor
should or would the sayd shipp in case she had arrived in safety to Hamburgh
have gone to Amsterdam, or any part of the goods or the proceed thereof
have bene sent thither or any other port of the United Provinces
for the Accompt of any of their subiects of the States of the sayd United
Provinces. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 15 he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Hamburgh, and hath
for his owne Accompt aboard the sayd shipp goods and merchandizes of
a good value, for the particulars whereof he referrs himselfe to his
bookes abiding in this Court. and hath interest in 1/8 part of the sayd shipp
as aforesayd and is the son of Christian Holst one of the part owners of
the sayd shipp And hopeth he shall have restitution of his owne
part of the sayd shipp and goods. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 16. he saith the sayd shipp began her outward voyage from Hamburgh
about three yeares since, and her lading was lead and tinn wax and other
Eastland goods, a good quantity whereof was for the Accompt of the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.153v Annotate
sayd John Schrothering and George Scrothering, but to what value
he remembreth not.

To the .17. negatively

To the 18. he saith he cannot depose

To the 19. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

Martin holst [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
----
The sixth day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Hendrick Freke of Hamburgh Mariner
Purser of the sayd shipp the Neptune aged
one and twenty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in the monethes of March Aprill May June July and August last
past 1653 the arlate Lewis de Boyes and Company Merchants and
Inhabitants of Hamburgh were and now are the rightfull Owners
of the sayd shipp the Neptune whereof Martin Holst is master and
Part owner, and for such the sayd de Boyes and Company were
and are commonly accounted which he knoweth being Purser of the
sayd shipp and an Inhabitant of Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in the yeare and monthes aforesayd the arlate John Scothering and
George Scothering and others merchants and Inhabitants of Hamburgh
were and att present are the lawfull Owners of the Oyle Almonds
Annis seeds galls and other merchandizes aboard the sayd shipp (the skipper and mariners goods onely excepted) and
for such were and are commonly accounted, which he knoweth being
Purser of the sayd shipp whereon the same were laden, and knoweth
that they were so laden for Reckening and Risko of the sauyd merchants
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about the
monethes of March and Aprill last past the arlate Joachim Lorenz
and David Zollicoffer and Thoams Van Dobbar or Bevar att Marselles
did lade aboard the sayd shipp all the sayd oyle and other goods for
the proper Accompt of the sayd Scotherings and other merchants
of Hamburgh to be in the sayd shipp transported to Hamburgh abd
there to be delivered to the sayd Owners thereof for their own accompts
and somuch the sayd factors did declare att Marseilles in the [?presence]
and hearing of this deponent. And otherwise he cannot depose
saving he saith the Master and Mariners did lade their owne goods
themselves
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.154r Annotate
To the fourth fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith and deposeth that the sayd Joachim Lorenz and David Zollicoffer
are by common repute Switzers, and the sayd Van Dobbar a high
German borne about ffrankfurt or Collon, and saith they are all of
them factors of the sayd Scrotherings and other the sayd merchants of
Hamburgh and so accounted and are Bachelors and live at Marseilles
as merchant strangers, And further saith that the sayd shipp the
Neptune was directly bound for Hamburgh and there was to deliver
all her lading, and was not to touch att any other Port, and to Hamburgh
if she had not bene stayd and taken should and would have gone, which
this deponent knoweth for the reasons aforesayd. And otherwise saving his
foregoeing depositions cannot depose.

To the eighth ninth and tenth articles of the sayd alleagtion This deponent saith
that the sayd John and George Scothering and others the Owners
of the sayd merchants goods aboard the sayd shipp were and are merchants
of goods ranke and have their howses and familyes in Hamburgh and
use to trade to Marseilles; and saith that one of the foresayd owners of
the Neptune videlicet Christian Holst did write  to the sayd Martin Holst
master of the sayd shipp whilst the shipp lay att Marseilles, and his
letter was to the effect as the sayd Martin Holst told this deponent
at Marseilles that he the sayd Martin Holst told this deponent
att Marseilles that he the sayd Martin should att noe hand take in
any goods for the Accompt of Hollanders or others of the United
Provinces. And saith whilst the syd shipp remained at Marseilles
it was publiquely spoken and reported that the sayd shipp and lading were
directly to goe to Hamburgh and not to Amsterdam or any other Port or
place in Holland or Zeland. And otherwise cannot depose

To the eleaventh article of the sayd allegation this deponents aith that in the absence
of this deponent and the master of the sayd shipp videlicet whilsest they were
buying provisions in Marseilles there was a young boy or youth left aboard
the sayd shipp and order left for transporting him to Hamburgh, and
that he was to learne the Dutch tongue, and the sayd youth was never
told for ought that this deponent knoweth that the sayd shipp was bound
for Amsterdam, but was allwayes told that she was to goe to Hamborow as
this deponent beleiveth. And saith he knoweth nothing of the letter in
this Article mentioned. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first he saith he is Purser of the Neptune and so hath bene for 33 monethes
and upwards, and came first aboard att Hamburgh and was in her att the tyme
of seizure

To the 2d he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp 4 yeares and upwards, and
hath heard it was built att Newstadt neere Lubeck by the present Owners
thereof, who for these four yeares past of the knowledge of tis deponent
have had the possession thereof and ymployed the same to their owne
use, And otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.154v Annotate
To the 3d he saith that Christian Holst and Martin Holst aforesayd
are Owners as he taketh it of one halfe of the sayd shipp, and the sayd
Lewis de Boys Gerdt Boremaster, Grise Boremaster, Albert
Bolstard Bearnes and others whose names he now calls not to mynde
are Owners of the other halfe of the sayd shipp, but the parts in her [?and]
parts of every of the sayd Owners he knoweth not. And saith all
the Owners of the sayd shipp were and are Inhabitants of Hamburgh
and by common repute have there lived all their tymes being natives of
the same place. And further he cannot depose.

To the .4. he saith he was not present att the first building buying and delivery
of the sayd shipp nor knoweth what money was payd for the same nor to whom

To the .5 he saith the aforesayd Owners did contribute to the fitting and
setting the sayd shipp to sea the last voyage and otherwise negatively

To the .6. he saith that the Owners of the saud goods are John and
George Scothering, Michael Huys, Mickael Engles, Cornelius de
Hertich, Paul Langerman, Jan Baptista Jonker Adrian Jonker and
others of Hamburgh whose names this deponent remembreth not, and
saith the aforesayd Martin Holst is likewise Owner of a good parcell
of the sayd goods and Lading, and all the sayd Owners are as he
saith Inhabitants of Hamburgh and there by common repute were
borne and have lived all their tyme. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .7th. he saith he hath knowne the interrate Zollicoffers and Van
Dobbar 2 yeares. and otherwise saving his former depositons cannot depose

To the .8th. he saith Zollicoffers and Van Dobbar were in Company of this Rendent
and the sayd Martin Holst att Marseilles, and aboard the sayd shipp.

To the .9th. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
knoweth not to depose, for that he saw none of the goods bought by
the sayd factors.

To the 10th. he saith he saw the sayd Zollicoffers and Van Dobbar bring and
lade aboard the sayd goods, and saith they are the producents factors

To the .11th. he saith there were severall bills of lading signed for the
sayd merchants goods of his certayne knowledge, and of each severall tenor three
but how many in all he remembreth not, but knoweth not of any bills of
lading for the skipper and Mariners goods

To the ,12, he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .13. he saith the sayd Joachim Lorenzo and David Zollicoffer and
Thomas Van Dobbar did by filling upp the bills of lading for the sayd
goods and by word of mouth acquaint this Rendent for whose Accompts the sayd
goods were laden and who was to beare the Adventure and hazard of
the same.

To the .14, he saith he is fully convinced that the sayd goods belong to Hamburg
onely, and that the sayd shipp was bound to Hamburgh onely. And otherwise
negatively.

To the ,15, he saith he is an Hamburgher both by birth and habitation
and hath a few Cloathes aboard the sayd shipp which he hopeth will be
restored to him. and otherwise negatively.

To the .16. he saith the sayd shipp began her outward voyage about [?XX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.155r Annotate
next will be three yeares and her lading was Oates peice goods and
Eastland goods which were laden att Hamburgh whence her voyage begann and saith a good part of
the sayd lading but to what value he knoweth not were for the Accompt
of the Scotherings interrate. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 17. 18. and 19th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

H. Favells [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3

Joachim Schouldt of Hamburgh Mariner aged
twenty yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
in the monethes of March Aprill May June July and August 1653
last past and before and since the arlate Lewis du Boyes, Adrian
Yonker. Gerdt Boremaster, Guis Boremaster, Christian Holst
Martin Holst and Company all Inhabitants of Hamburgh were and
are lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the sayd shipp the Neptune
whereof Martin Holst aforesayd is master and of her tackle and
furniture, and so accounted which he knoweth being an Inhabitant
of Hamburgh and one of the Mariners of the sayd shipps Company
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the second third fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith and deposeth that in the yeare and monethes aforesaid the arlate
John and George Scothering Adrian Yonker and others merchants and
Inhabitants of Hamburgh were and are the Owners of the merchants
goods and lading aboard the sayd shipp being oyle almonds, Annis seeds
Galls sope and other goods, and so accounted the premisses he knoweth
for that he saw the arlate Joachim Lorenz and David Zollicoffer and
Thomas Van Dabbar the producents ffactors att Marselles about the
moneth of Aprill last past there lade and putt abpard the sayd shipp
the oyle almonds and goods aforesayd for the Accompt and Risko
of the sayd Hamburgh merchants to be in the sayd shipp transported
to Hamburgh whither the sayd shipp was bound and there to be
delivered to the sayd Hamburgh merchants for their owne Accompt
And the sayd ffactors did expressely declare in the presence and hearing
of this deponent that the sayd goods were for the Accompt aforesayd
And otherwise cannot depose, saving that by common repute the sayd
ffactors are all Bachelors resing att Marsellis in the quality of gactors
and Merchant strangers, and that the sayd Zollicoffers are Switzers
and the sayd Van Dobbar = or Bevar if of ffrankfurt in Germany
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.155v Annotate
To the sixth seventh eigh nynth and tenth hee saith an deposeth that
the sayd shipp and goods were directly bound for Hamburgh and to
noe other Port and somuch was as he saith generally knowne
and taken notice of att Marseilles before she came from thence
And saith that the sayd Scotherings and Yonker and other the
Owners of the sayd Goods are all of them Inhabitants of Hamburgh
and merchants of good ranke there, and such as use o trade to
Marseilles and for such are commonly accounted reputed and
taken. but saith he knoweth not what effects they had in the hands
of their sayd factors, nor of any order given the sayd Martin
Holst bu his Owners not to take in Hollands goods. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that there
was a boy or youth aboard the sayd shipp that was to be carryed to
Hamburgh but of the letter allegat he knoweth nothing
And further cannot depose saving he beleiveth the saud boy was
never told that the shipp the Neptune was bound to or was to goe to
Amsterdam but was told that she was to goe for Hamburgh./

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he is one of the shipps Company hath so bene for neare
about 3 yeares, came aboard first att Hamburgh and was in her att the
tyme of seizure interrate.

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp about 4 years and
hath heard she was built neere Lubeck by the aforesayd Owners, who
so long as this deponent hath knowne the sayd shipp habe imployed
her as their owne. and otherwise cannot depose

To the 3. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd saving that
the Owners of the sayd shipp are by common repute natoves of Hamburgh
and have dwelt there all their tyme and there now dwell.

To the .4. he saith he saw not the first building or delivery of the sayd
shipp to the Owners. nor saw any oney payd for the same.

To the .5. he saith the aforesayd Onwers did contribut to the setting forth
the sayd shipp to sea the voyage interrate. and otherwise
negatively.

To the .6. he saith the names of the Owners of the goods interrate
John Scothering, George Scothering, Adrian Jonker, Jan
Baptista Jonker, Paul Longerman, Michael Hais, Cornelis
de Hertich, Michel Engles, Martin Holst and others whose
names he remembreth not have likewise goods aboard, and saith
the sayd Owners are Natives and Inhabitants of Hamburgh and [?there]
by common repute have lived all their dayes.

To the .7. 8. 9. 10. 11 and 12. he saith he hath knowne the interrate
Zollicoffers and Thomas van Bevar or Debar about a yeare and an [?halfe]
and saith he saw them bring the sayd goods aboard and sawe them
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.156v Annotate
Rochford to be for his accompt transported in the sayd shipp to Nantes
in ffrance and there delivered for his use unto Nicholas Lee
And saith he afterwards videlicet on or about the
28 day of June saw the sayd Cornelius Jacobsen Seyle signe three
bills of lading all of one tenor for the sam, att Bilboa, and the
bill of lading to the allegation anexed and now shewne him this examinat
was and is one of the sayd bills which this deponent saw so signed
as aforesayd for the same, for which causes this deponent verily beleiveth
that the sayd David Rochford then was and now is the lawfull Owner
and Proprietor of the sayd bagg of money. And saith that att the
tyme aforesayd the sayd David England did acquaint this deponent
that he had laden aboard the sayd shipp the tyme and place aforesayd one
bagg f moneyes conteyning about 139 peices of 8/8 and five ryalls
of plate in the same, the sayd bagg being of the second marke in the

'X VVF 1' [SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

margent; And saith that soone after videlicet on or about the
sayd 28th day of June 1653. he this deponent saw the sayd Cornelis
Jacobsen Soel signe three bills of lading for the same And saith the bill of lading
now showne this deponent and remaining in the Registry of this Court whereto for the
more certainty of the markes and number of peices of eight and ryalls
of plate this deponent referreth himselfe was and is one of the sayd originall bills signed in this deponents sight And further saith that
the sayd England then told this deponent that he did lade the sayd 139 pieces
of 8/8 and 5 ryalls of plate for the Accompt of the arlate William ffagan
to be transported in the sayd shipp to Nantes aforesayd and thereto to be
delivered for his use, to Patrick [?Rice] for
which causes this deponent verily beleiveth that the sayd Williamffaganin June and July aforesayd was and now is the Lawfull owner of the
sayd 139 peices of 8/8 and 5 Ryalls of plate. And otherise cannot
depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation he saith he saw the sayd David England
write signe seale and direct two letters of Advise to the arlate Nicholas Lee and [?Patrick]
Rice att Nantz touching the moneyes aforesayd, but the particulars
of the sayd letters remembereth not.

To the sixth he saith he verily beleiveth for the reasons aforesayd  that [?none]
but the sayd Rochford and ffagan are any way voncerned in the [?XXX]
of the sayd moneyes, and verily beleiveth that noe subiect of the [?XX]
of the United Provinces or King of ffrance or of any Prince or
State in hostility against this Commonwealth had or hath any interest
therein or any part thereof.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth that
the arlate David England and Nicholas Lee were in June 1653 [?and]
before, the factors of the producent David Rockford, and att the same [?time]
and before the arlate David England Valentine Morgan and [?XXX]
Rice were the ffactors of the sayd William ffagan and so accompted
the premisses he knoweth by his correspondency with the sayd David
England And otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.157r Annotate
To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Nicholas
Lee and Patrick Rice are by birth Irish men and live att Nantes in
the quality of factors and merchant strangers, and the sayd Valentine
Morgan and David England arlate are Irishmen and factors resident
in Spaine, the premisses he knoweth being the correspondent of all the
sayd persons. And saith that none of them the sayd Lee Rice Morgan
or England were or are subiects of the States Generalll of the United
Provinces or King of ggrance or any Prince or State in hostility with
England that ever this deponent heard knoweth or beleiveth and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after the lading
of the sayd moneyes as aforesayd the sayd shipp set sayle from Bilboa and
in her Course for Nantes was seized by the arlate Captaine Wills
and Company in the shipp Handmaid And the aforesayd moneyes were
then on board and came into the possession of the Takers who still detayne
the same, the premisses he knoweth comeing a Passenger in the
sayd shipp and being aboard att the tyme of seizure. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
David Rochford and William ffaggan by common repute are Natoives of
Ireland. and saith  the sayd Rochford by like repute was and is an Inhabitant of Limmerick
a subiect of this Commonwealth and well affected, having served the same
in supplying their Armies with Corne from England. and the saud
William ffaffan was and is by report an Inhabitant of Corke a subiect of thios
Commonwealth and well affected, and saith tht neither of the sayd
parties ever were that this deponent knoweth or hath heard subiects of
the sayd States of the United Provinces King of ffrance or any Prince or
State in hostility with this Commonwealth And otherwise cannot depose

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes att the desire of Daniell Arthur, and
saith he hath knowne William ffagan by sight about three yeares. and David
Rochford for the like tyme by common report onely and not otherwise and
further otherwise than negatively he cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith he was borne at Gallaway in Ireland, and beleives he
is not bound to answer or declare what religion he professes; and saith
that in the yeares 1643. 1644. 1645. 1646. he lived at Iypre and Lisle in
fflanders, and in the yeares 1647. 1648. 1649. 1650. 1651. and about
one moneth 1652. in Holland and Zealand, sometymes att Middleburgh,
sometymes att Amsterdam and since Aprill 1652. to July 1653. in
Spaine sometymes att Cadiz sometymes att Bilboa, from whence he
came in July last, and came to this citty in the same month, and hath
since here resided. and otherwise cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.157v Annotate
To the .3d. he saith he  cannot depose otherwise then he hath deposed

To the .4. negatively to every part thereof

To the .5. hee saith he was att Bilboa when the sayd moneyes were laden
and saw the same in baggs, but saw it not told nor laden. and otherwise
saveing his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the .6. he saith the shipp Saint Peter did about the tyme of lading the
sayd sylver or moneyes ride in the River of Bilboa within pistoll shott
of the shoare. and he saw the bills of lading signed for the sayme as aforesayd
in Bilboa ashoare, and knoweth the bills to him now showne to be two of
the bills by the markes firmes and contents thereof, and saith he never
had them in his possession, and beleiveth he was in Bilboa when the moneyes
were laden. and otherwise saving his foregoing depositions cannot depose.

To the .7th he saith he was aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure and had aboard for
his owne Accompt 1000 peices of 8/8 311. kintalls of Iron, one bagg of
Ambergreese worth 212 peices of eight and 1/2 a bagg conteyning 75 peices of 8/8 and the value of 147 1/2 peices of
Tin [?mould] .1. bag or Cloth with 36 peices of 8/8 1/2; which sayd .3. last parcells this deponent
delivered into the hands of the sayd Cornelis Jacobsen [?Soyl] and had noe bills of lading for the afpresayd [?XX]
and otherwise negatively.

To the .8th he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and further
cannot depose.

To the .9th he saith he was not bound to nor had any intention to goe into
Holland Zealand or any of the United Provinces, nor hath any intent  or [?XX]
to goe thither, nor hath he any howse there, and is a factor for his
father in Spaine whither he is to retourne and there reside as a
Merchant Stranger, and hath an howse in Gallaway aforesayd as
heyre apparent to his father Dominick Marten a merchant of Galloway. and saith
he lived some tyme in Holland and Zealand as aforesayd.

To the .10th. negatively to every part thereof.

To the 11th he saith that att the tyme of seizure this deponent had severall
bills of lading and papers in his Custody which concerned not
the sayd shipp Peter nor her lading, and those this Rendent about September
after the arrivall of the sayd shipp att ffoy did deliver to Captaine
Wills in the presence of a Notary publique in this REndents lodging at
ffoy. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 12th he saith he saw the sayd letters writen by David England
aforesayd about the beginning of July or latter end of June 1653
and saith he remembers not the effescts of the sayd letters, but beleiveth
they were reall, and that hey came to the hands of Captaine Wills
aforesayd.

[To the .13. negatively to every part thereof, for e saith he never [?XX]
that the producents sent any goods to David England.

To the 14. he saith he hath knowne David England 4 yeares, and he resideth
in Bilbo, and Valentine Morgan one yeare and he resideth at Saint
Seabastians, and hath knowne Nicholas Lee by correspondency about
one yeare, and he resides in Nantes, as likewise in June last did
Patrick Rice whom this deponent hath often heard of but knoweth not


HCA 13/68 f.158r Annotate
And saith he doth not know nor hath heard that any of the sayd 4 persons
were or are factors or Agents dealing for Dutchmen subiects of the
States of the United Provinces or ffrenchmen subiects of the ffrench King
and otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions cannot depose, saving that
the sayd England hath resided in Bilboa about 4 yeares.

To the 15th he saith that the sayd shipp the Saint Peter immediately before
the seizure by the English was in the possession of Dutchmen subiects of
the States of the United Provinces, and saith tht amost of her Company
were as he beleiveth subiects of the sayd States, and saith the sayd shipp
was bound for Nantes in ffrance and thiher would have carryed all her
lading in case she had not bene seized by Captaine Wills as aforesayd And
otherwise cannot depose.

Top the .16. he saith he hath heard the aforesayd Daniel Arthur say that he
hath Order to clayme the moneyes in question for the producents, who as he
sayd sent the sayd Order out of ffrance. And otherwise negatively

To the 17th he saith the sayd Daniel Arthur is a native of Limmerick in Ireland
and so accounted, and was borne as this Rendent hath heard of English
Parents, and saith he was in ffrance about 5 or 6 yeares agoe to learne
the ffrench tongue, but when he came from thence or how long he did there
reside this Rendent knoweth not. and otherwise negatively saying that as
he hath heard the sayd Arthur hath lived in England about
a yeare and a halfe.

Thomas Martyn [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The seventh day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Andrew Creach of Corke)
in Ireland and of Patrick Creagh of Limmerick in Ireland)
for their sylver in the Saint Peter whereof Cornelius Jacobson)
Seyl was master taken and surprized by the ship the)
Handmaid whereof Charles Wills was then Captaine)
Budd ffrancklyn)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd Claymers.

1

Thomas Martin of Galloway in Ireland, merchant
aged 25 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first and second Articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent saith and
deposeth that being att Bilboa in Spaine in the month of June 1653 last
past the arlate David England then and there hold him that he had

'[?] 5. 6. 7. 8. 9' [LH MARGIN]

'[?X] 10. 11. 12' [LH MARGIN]

laden aboard the arlate shipp the Saint Peter then lying in the River of Bilboa
Cornelius Jacobson Stey being master of the sayd shipp, wight baggs of moneys
marked and numbred in the margent conteyning in all two thousand
two hundred forty eight currant peices of [?8/8] for the Accompt of the
arlate Andrew and [?ffrances CROSSED OUT] Creagh to be transported to Nantes in ffrance and there delivered to Patrick Rice for the sayd [?Creagh] for which moneys this deponent did
afterwards see bills of lading signed, for which reasons and the reasons
hereafter followeing he is well assured that the sayd Patrick and
Andrew Vreagh in June and July last past were and now are the Owners
and lawfull Proprietors of the sayd 2248 peices of eightes. And
otherwise saving his subsequent depositions he cannot depose

To the third fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation and to the bill of
lading to the same annexed he saith that on or about the 28th day of
June 1653 he saw the arlate Cornelius Jacobson Seyl signe three bills
of lading all of one tenor for the sayd 2248 peices of eight att Bilboa
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.158v Annotate
And saith that the bill of lading to the sayd allegation annexed was and is
one of the sayd originall bills of lading for the sayd 2248 peices of
8/8 which this deponent saw as aforesayd signed att Bilboa And further
saith that although in the sayd bill and the other 2 bills mentioned as aforesayd
to be signed for the same the sayd moneyes are entred for the Accompt of
John White, Andrew Creagh and Patrick Creagh yet in truth the sayd
moneyes doe appertaine to the sayd Andrew and Patrick onely by way of
property, and not to the sayd John White, the reason of this deponents
knowledge in the premisses was and is, for that before the lading of the
sayd moneyes as aforesayd he saw in the hands of the sayd David [?England]
an order or direction under the hand of the sayd Andrew Creagh for the
receyving of and from ffrances Bodkin of Bilboa 800 dukets of plate
and to remitt the same in peices of 8/8 to Nantes there to be disposed by
the directon of the sayd John White for the Accompt of the producents of
which John White was and is a ffactor of and for the producents; and [?saith]
likewise att the same tyme a letter and bill of exchange drawne by the
sayd Andrew Creagh in the hands of the sayd ffrancis Badkin who was ?pXXX
ordered to pay 800 ducatts of plate to the sayd David England. And this
deponent saith he saw the sayd 800 duckatts accordingly payd to the
sayd England by the sayd Badkin, and knoweth that the sayd England
did convert them into peices of 8/8. and that he did lade them as he [?XX]
for the Accompt aforesayd. And otherwise referring himselfe [?to the]
Acts of this Court he cannot depose saving his subsequent deposition.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation. this deponent saith that soone after the [?lading]
of the sayd moneyes he saw the sayd David England att Biboa signe [?XXX]
and direct a letter of Advise directed to Patrick Rice att Nantes being the correspondent
of the sayd John White, touching the moneyes now in question and [?sawe]
a bill of lading was sent together with the sayd letter. And further he cannot
depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation he saith that for the reasons aforesaid
he is well assured and verily beleiveth that noe subiect of the States of the
united Provinces or King of ffrance had or hath any share or Interest
in the sayd moneyes, nor the subiect of any Prince or State in [hostility]
with this Commonwealth. And otherwise referring himselfe to his
foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the eighth and ninth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the sayd David England is an Irishman and so accounted and the
sayd Patrick Rice is by common report an Irishman and did in June
and July last reside as a Merchant stranger att Nantes, and  both or
eyther of them were and are by like repute factors of and for the producent
and never were nor are subiects of the sayd States of the United Provinces
ffrench King or any Prince or State in Enmity with England that this
deponent ever knew or heard of. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the tenth he saith that after the lading of the sayd moneyes oas aforesayd
the sayd shipp Saint Peter sett sayle from Balboa and in her course to [?XXX]
whither she was bound was taken and seized by the shipp Handmaide
arlate whereof Captaine Wills was Commander, and saith he this deponent
being then a Passenger aboard the sayd shipp then saw the sayd [?XXX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.159r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause by the meanes of Daniel Arthur
and hath knowne the producents about five yeares respectively.

To the .2. he saith he is a native of Galloway in Ireland, and beleiveth he is
not bound to give an Accompt of his faitha nd Religion in this Court. and saith
in the yeares 1643. 1644. 1645. 1656. he lived at Ipre and Lisle in fflanders
in the yeares 1647. 1648. 1649. 1650. 1651. and one moneth in the yeare 1652
in the United Provinces sometymes at Middelburgh, somwtymes att Amsterdam
and in the yeare 1652 from Aprill in the same yeare till July 1653 in
Spaine videlicet in Cadiz . and came from Bilboa about the beginning
of July last and arrived in this Citty within the same moneth where he
hathr eswided ever since. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith the interrate John White in the sayd bills of lading mentioned
is an Irishmanand lives in Amsterdam as a factor and ad a wife living there
and this Rendent hath knowne him live there about 4 or 5 yeares before the
yeare .1652. and saith he knoweth not whether he hath constantly lived
there since that tyme, and did formerly live in Limmerick where he was borne
and hath an estate of inheritance, and Patrick Creagh was borne in Limmerick
but where he hath lived for theise .10. yeares past he knoweth not. And saith
the sayd Andrew Creagh is now in the West Indies, and did before the warrs
betwixt England and Holland for severall yeares live att Amsterdam as a merchant stranger, for
how long tyme in certayne he knoweth not. and saith upon the breaking out of
the sayd warr he forsooke Amsterdam as this deponent hath heard and went into
fflanders, and from thence to the sayd Indies and otherwise he cannot depose

To the .4th. negatively to every part thereof.

To the .5th. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions wherein he
hath declared all he knoweth touching the lading of the sayd moneyes. and
further being not aboard att the lading thereof knoweth not to depose.

To the .6. he saith the sayd shippe att the tyme of lading with the sayd moneyes
lay within pistoll shot of the shoare att Bilbo. and saith he saw the sayd bills
of lading signed ashoare att Bilboa, and knowes the bill of lading now
showne him to be one of the sayd originall bills by the markes firmes
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.159v Annotate
and contents thereof and by the handwriting of the sayd David England who [?filled]
the same up in this deponents presence. and further otherwise than negatively
he cannot depose saving as aforesayd.

To the 7. he saith he came along in the Saint Peter and had in her goods upon his
owne Accompt 1000. pieces of 8/8. and 311. kintalls of Iron for which he had bills
of lading one bagg of ambergrease worth 212 pieces of 8/8 1/2. one bag with
75 pieces of 8/8 and gold in value of 147 1/2 pieces of 8/8. and one cloth with 36 1/2 pieces of
8/8 for which he had noe bills of lading. and otherwise negatively.

To the 8 he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .9th. he saith he hath lived in Holland and Zealand as aforesayd. But
had noe intention to goe to Holland when the shipp was seized neyther
hath any such intention now or hereafter to goe thither. and saith hee for
the present lives as a Merchant factor and hath a howse and Inheritance in
Galloway as heyre apparent to his father Dominick Martin a merchant and
Inhabitant there. and further cannot depose.

To the .10. negatively to every part thereof, saving he beleiveth that the
name of the sayd White was by David England putt in the bills of
lading aforesayd as one that was the producents factor, by whose
order the sayd moneyes were to be disposed for the producents Accompt
and use.

To the 11th he saith that he this Rendent about 2 dayes after the Peters arrivall att ffoy did
to deliver to Captaine Mills in this Rendents lodgings in ffoy severall bills of lading
and Letters, none whereof as he remembreth did any way concerne the sayd shipp
the Peter or her lading. and otherwise negatively.

To the .12. he saith he saw the sayd letter interrate in the hands of David England
about the latter end of June att Bilboa. and beleiveth the contents thereof
are true and reall. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .13. negatively to every part thereof.

To the 14 he saith for the respective persons named in the sayd bills of lading
that the sayd John White hath as he beleiveth lived in Amsterdam about
six yeares, and there now lived as he hath heard. and Andrew Creach liveth [?att]
the West Indies as factor or Merchant Stranger and so hath done about a yeere
as this deponent hath heard, and knoweth not the certaine present residence of the
sayd Patrick Creach, but hath heard he nnow  resides in fflanders and formerly lived att Limmerick and so hath done
a good part of his tyme. and David England hath lived in Bilbo .4. yeeres and
there now resides and Patrick Rice was and is as he hath heard Resident [?as factor or]
as a merchant stranger. and he hath knowne the sayd England 4 yeares. and [?knoweth]
not Patrick Rice but by report onely. And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition
he cannot depose.

To the 15 he saith the shipp Saint Peter att the tyme of seizure was in the possession of Dutchmen subiects of the
States of the United Provinces and her Company were most of them Dutch subiects of the [?States]
And she and her lading were bound for Nantes in ffrance and thither would have gone if
they had bot bene hindred.

To the .16. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .17. he saith that Daniel Arthur interrate is a native of Limmerick in Ireland and
hath lived in England about a yeare and an halfe as he hath heard. and about [?a ?yeaere]
agoe lived in ffrance as he hath heard. but when he came last from thence this
Rendent saith he knoweth not. and otherwise negatively. And further[?he]
cannot depose.

Thomas [?HaXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.160r Annotate
The seventh day of October 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Patrick Browne merchant of)
[?Galloway] in Ireland, and of Nicholas Geraldine of Waterford)
in Ireland for their moneys and sylver in the shipp the)
'Saint Peter (whereof Cornelius Jacobson Seyl was master))
[?XXX] taken and surprized by the shipp the Handmaid)
whereof Charles Wills was the Captaine.)
Smith ffrancklin)

'Thomas Martin' of Gallaway in Ireland merchant aged five
and twenty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith and deposeth that the arlate
Patrick Browne in the monethes of June and July 1653 last past was and
att present is the true and lawfull Owner of the four hundred peices of 8/8

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]
'I'
'PB'
'No 1 2'

arlate conteyned  in the two baggs of the first marke in the margent, and the
sayd Nicholas Geraldine the tyme aforesayd was and is lawfull Owner of

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]
'NG'
'3 4'

four hundred peices of eight conteyned in two baggs of the second marke
in the margent and so accompted, the premisses he knoweth for that the
factors of the sayd Browne and  Geraldine of the certaine knowledge of
this deponent did buy and procure the sayd moneyes for the sayd respective
Claymers and by their respective Orders and their Accompts respectively
and this deponent saw all the ayd moneyes told, and assisted att the
telling thereof, and did bagg upp the same, and saw the same marked
with the respective markes aforesayd and saith the premisses were so had and
done in Bilboa in Spaine in June last past. And otherwise saving his
subsequent depositions he cannot depose.

To the second he saith that the sayd Browne and Geraldine by their respective
factors and for their owne Accompt did in the month of June 1653 att
Bilbo in Spaine lade aboard the sayd shippe Saint Peter Cornelius Jacobson
Seyl master all the said moneyes to be for their sayd Accompts and
Risgo respectively transported in the sayd shipp from Bilboa to Nantes in
ffrance and there to be delivred for their use and Accompt respectively.
the premisses he knoweth for that he saw the respective factors of the sayd
Claymers deliver the sayd moneyes in the baggs marked as aforesayd
to the sayd Master of the shipp Cornelius Jacobson Sley (sic) to carry, and putt
aboard for the Accompts aforesayd, and afterwards saw the sayd Master firme
to[?10] bills of lading for the same accordingly. And otherwise cannot depose

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation and to the bills of lading exhibited
This deponent saith that after the lading of the sayd moneyes as aforesayd
this deponent saw bills of lading signed for the same att Bilboa that is to
say upon the 26th day of June 1653 he saw the sayd Cornelius Jacobson
Seyl signe three bills of lading all of one tenor for the sayd 400, peices
of 8/8 of the sayd first marke in the margent, and saith the bill of lading
exhibited remaining in the Registry of this Court was and is one of the
sayd bills, and the contents thereof were and are true. And saith that
upon the 28th day of June 1653. he saw the foresayd Cornelius Jacobson
Sayle signe three bills of lading all of one tenor for the 400. peices of
8/8 conteyned in the sayd two baggs of the sayd second marke in the margent
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.160v Annotate
And saith that the bill of lading exhibited annexed to the sayd allegation
and now shewne him this Examinat was and is one of the sayd bills
of laing, and the contents thereof were and are true and reall, and
other wise referring himselfe to the Acts of this Court he cannot depose

To the fifth he saith he saw all Bilboa severall letters writt by the sayd
factor David England and ffrances Bodkins directed to Patrick [?Browne]
and Thomas Barnwell att Nantes for and touching
the sayd moneyes, the particulars of which letters he remembreth not
and as he remembreth there were some of the sayd bills of lading [?inclosed]
in the sayd letters, And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth he saith that for the reasons aforesayd he is assured that
the sayd moneyes now claymed by the sayd Browne and Geraldine nor
any part thereof did not nor doth belong to the subiects of the States
of the united Provinces King of ffrance or any Prince or State in
hostility with this Commonwealth, nor to any of them, and otherwise he
cannot depose saving as aforesayd.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the arlate David
England ffrancis Bodkin and Thomas Barnewell were and are [?Irishmen]
respectively and so accounted. And saith the sayd Barnwell resideth at
Nantes as a Merchant Stranger, and this deponent doth not know or ever
heard that the sayd persons or any of them is or ever was or were subiects
of the States of the united Provinces King of ffrance or any Prince or
State in hostility against this Commonwealth or that they or any of them was
or were so accompted. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that after lading of the sayd moneyes as aforesayd the sayd shipp [?did]
sayle from Bilboa and in her Course for Nantes whither she was bound
was seized by Captaine Wills and Company in the shipp Handmaid[?en]
And saith the sayd baggs of moneyes now claymed by the producents
were then aboard of the sight of this deponen who came a Passenger
in the sayd shipp from Bilboa, and came into the possession and [?XX]
of the sayd Takers, who still detaine the same, And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the producents
are both of them Irishmen and subiects of this Commonwealth living under
the protection thereof and so accounted, and the sayd Patrick Browne
in June last was an Inhabitant of Galloway in Ireland, and the
sayd Geraldine of Waterford in Ireland, and for dwellers and
Inhabitants of and in the sayd places respectively the sayd producents
have bene and are commonly accounted and reputed, And this deponent for
his part never heard that eyther of them ever was or is a subiect of
the States of the united Provinces King of ffrance or any Prince or [?King]
in hostility against the Commonwealth or so accounted.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.161r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes att the request of Daniel Arthur and saith
he knoweth the Producents. and hath knowne Patrick Browne aforesaid from a Child
and Nicholas Geraldin .3 yeares. And otherwise negatively

To the 2. he saith he is an Irishman borne, and for his Religion is not bound to declare
it as he beleiveth, and saith he is a merchant factor not having any sett and
fixed dwelling. and saith from the yeare 1642. to 1646. he lived in fflanders
and from 1646. to the beginning of 1652. in Holland and Zealand. and from
Aprill 1652. to July 1653 in Spaine, and came from thence in July last and arrived
there in the same month and ever sithence hath bene resident in this Citty and
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .3d. he saith he cannot depose otherwise touching the habitation or condition
of the producents than he hath deposed, saving that the sayd Browne hath lived
in Galloway all his tyme

To the .4.th negatively to every part thereof.

To the .5. and 6. he saith the bills of lading were signed a shoare att Bilbo
and he knoweth the bills now shewne him to be two of the originall bills
for the same by the markes formes and contents thereof. and otherwise
being not aboard att the lading of the moneyes in question, saving his
foregoeing depositions to which he referreth himselfe he knoweth not to
depose.

To the 7. he saith he came along in the sayd shipp and had aboard for his
owne Accompt .1000 peices of 8/8 and 75 peices of 8/8. and gold to the value of
147½ peices of 8/8. and 36½ peices of 8/8 more. and one bag of amber greese
of the value of 212½ peices of 8/8. and 311 kintalls of Iron spanish weight
and otherwise negatively

To the 8. he cannot depose otherwise than he hath deposed.

To the 9. he saith he hath lived in Holland and Zealand as he hath above
declared, and hath noe howse there. but hath an Inheritance as hayre apparent
to his father in Galloway. and saith he had noe intent att the tyme of
seizure of the shipp Peter aforesayd to goe into Holland or any of the
united Provinces neyther now hath any such purpose.

To the .10. he saith he doth not know nor hath heard that the sayd producents
did ever use to colour other mens goods in their names. and otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the .11.th he saith that he did about 2. dayes after the Saint Peter came to
ffoy deliver to Captaine Mills in this Rendents owne Lodging in ffoy
severall bills of lading and papers. and otherwise negatively.

To the .12.th he saith he saw the letters predeposed and now interrogated n the hands of ffrancis
Bodkins and David England att Bilbo about the latter end of
June 1653. last past. And beleiveth the contents thereof were and
are true. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith he never saw any goods sent from the producents or by
them to the interrate England or ffrancis Bodkin or eyther
of them, saving a quantity ofhides in the hands of ffrancis Bodkin sent
to him as himselfe sayd about Aprill last from the sayd Browne.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.161v Annotate
To the .14. he saith he hath knowne ffrancis Bodkin from his Childhood and
he is by birth an Irishman, and now liveth in Bilbo and so hath done for about
6 yeares. and before that all his tyme in Galloway. and hath knowne Thomas
Barnewell by report 4 yeares and he is a merchant factor residing in
Nantes for about 4 yeares. And the producents he hath knowne as aforesayd. And knoweth not
what trade or factorages any of the sayd Persons mannage otherwise
than as aforesayd for Irish and English merchants. And further he
cannot depose.

To the 15. he saith the sayd shipp Saint Peter att the tyme of seizure was
in the possession of Dutchmen subiects of the States of the united Provinces
and her Company were most of them Dutch subiects of the States
aforesayd. and the sayd shipp and her lading were bound for Nantes
in ffrance and thither would have gone if they had not bene seized
as aforesayd.

To the .16. he saith the producents as he hath heard by Daniel Arthur
did send to him the sayd Daniel Arthur order to clayme the moneyes
in question for their Accompts, and this deponent beleiveth they have
so done. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 17. he saith the sayd Daniel Arthur is an Irishman and noe
ffrenchman nor subiect of the ffrench King, And he the sayd Arthur
as this Rendent hath heard hath bene Resident in England about [?one]
yeare and an halfe., and did about 6 yeares agoe live in ffrance but
when he came last from thence this deponent knoweth not. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

Thomas Macq[?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Doctor Godolphin)
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.162r Annotate
XX [CHECK]

The 21th of October 1653.

[?Christan] and company against the)
greate Christofer, aforesaid.)

Examined upon the foresaid allegation given in the first place
and upon another allegation given in the second place
on the behalfe of [?Estrid] [?Christan] and company.

5

Thomas Brothers of Deale in Kent Sailer, aged 27 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the third article of the allegacion given in the first place hee saith and deposeth
that about five weekes since the said shipp the greate Christofer under the conduct
of his precontest Mrt Monnet, Captaine Swaines lieutenant came into Alborough
bay in her course for London, in which bay the Parliaments fleete was then [?remayninge]
and after such her comming thither Generall Munck put three of his men
(Whereof this deponent was one) aboard to help to bringe her up for this
port, and that presently
the stiersman would have had this deponent and his two partners and the said
Lieutenant to have laine in the Cookeroome and to have left the great
cabbin to them, which this deponent and partners refusing and endeavouring
to get the key of the cabbin, one of the said merchants strooke this deponent
and called him Sacraments-steert, a terme of greate contempt, And
the same night comming neere [?XXXXX] this deponent and company endeavouring to see what papers
they tooke and concealed, one of the said merchants in oppositione drewe
his knife and the steersman gave them upbrading language, tending to
raise a mutinie, And the rest of the dutch stood readie to
abet and further the said mutinie. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the first second third and 4tha rticles of the second allegacion hee saith and deposeth
that after such his comminge aboard hee heard some of the said dutch company
of the said vessell say sometimes that they were bound for
ffrance and other times for Ostend and that they had mett with de Witt
the hollands Admirall, and had his passe, and the Cooke said and
confessed that they had heaved their cockets over board and were bound for
Amsterdam, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fifth hee cannot depose.

To the crosse Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee can speake and understand dutch and Italian
indifferently well and that English is his mother tongue, and otherwise
negatively for his part.

To the second hee knoweth not as hee saith of any goods or clothes taken out
of the said shipp.

To the third hee saith that comming into Alborough bay as aforesaid, one of
the said dutch merchants came aboard Generall Munck and complained unto
him against Lieutenanjt Monnet and companie as having [?XXXX] him and the
company of the Christofer, and desired him to take Lieutenant Monets men
out and put some of his men aboard to ringe her up, unlesse
hee pleased to cleare her, for which hee made sute to the Generall alleadging
that shee was a free shipp, but the Generall refused to cleare her and yet
at his request tooke three of Mr Monets men out and put three
of his owne men into her to help to bring her up, and otherwise negatively
saving that when the said dutch resisted and would have kept them out of the
cabbin the English [?drabbed] them a little to bringe them o better behaviour.

To the fourth hee saith that after and upon the said [?resistance] in Lea roade, the said
Magaet turned the said two merchants ashore at Quinborough, having
first taken their papers from them and [?XXX] them [?up ?to] their [?presence] And otherwise hee cannot depose.

Tho Brotheares [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Godolphin and Mr Cock.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.162v Annotate
The 22th of October. 1653:-

The clayme of the King of Poland for all and)
singular the goods lately seized in the shipp the George)
John Pieterson Griepe Master except sixtie Cases of)
Glasse and five Tonns of Vinegar belonging to the)
said Master and Companie Suckley Smith)

Examined upon an Allegation on the
behalf of His Majestie the King of
Poland and upon the schedule annexed to the
same.

1.

George Dattivors of Roane in ffrance
ffactor of the King and Queene of Poland
aged 30. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne
and examined saith as followeth Videlicet:

That in or about the moneth of August last oast this deponent as ffactor
and Agent for the King and Queene of Poland (and by their order [?imparted]
to this deponent by Mr [?Crooso?XX] receiver of the sayd Queenes revenue in ffrance and Madam des Esarts persons of
great quality at Paris) freighted the said shipp the Saint George at Dieppe in
ffrance for the transpoting of some Religious persons ffryers and Nunns
and their Attendants from thence to Dantzick, And this deponent at or about the
time aforesaid caused to be laden and putt aboard the said shipp the George
all and singular the goods mentioned and particularized in the schedule annexed
to the said Allegation now read over to this examinate, and compared and agreeing with
another of the same contents written in the ffrench tongue, which said schedule
containeth and expresseth the whole lading of the said shipp, (except a certaine
quantity of glasses and Vinegar belonging to the Master and mariners of the
said shipp and a case of fine earthen ware all which said goods menconed in the said schedule were for the use
of the said Religious persons and their attendants, and for their Vestments religious
habits and ornaments for their Religious house in Poland, and were for the
proper accompts of the said King and Queene of Poland and their domestiques
And saith that no subjects of the King of ffrance or States of the United Provinces
had or have any interest in any part or parcell of the said foods schedulate,
which hee knoweth being as aforesaid ffactor to and for the said King and Queen
and in their name and on their behalfe haveing expressely laden all such singular
goods as aforesaid, And further saith That the said shipp is a Hamburger shipp
and for such and as a free shipp expressely freighted by this deponent and the
Master thereof is an Hamburgher, And the said King and Queen of Poland
and all the persons interessed in the goods schedulate, were and are persons in
amity with this Commonwealth, And beleeveth that the said persons now seized being
religious persons are and ought by the Law of Nations to be priviledged and not
searched molested or interrupted in their travailes, yet the said religious persons
as is notorious, have been very uncivilly treated by the seizors as this deponent
hath Credibly understood, as also that the said seizors did take away all the
said shipps provisions amounting to the valew of about 200: li sterling which this
deponent had also caused to be Laden aboard the said shipp for the said voyage, and
sevall goods trunks and ?males from the passengers of very great valew. The
premisses hee deposeth being as a foresaid factor to the said King and Queene, and by
them expressely imployed for the hireing lading fitting and furnishing of the
said shipp and the goods schedulate upon their accompt: And otherwise cannot depose

To the Interrogatories
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.163r Annotate
To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith, That hee cometh to bee a Wittnesse in this Cause by
the meanes and perswasion of Monsieur Levesqrues of Paris and Madam des Escarts
to declare the trueth of his knowledge on the behalfe of the said King and
Queene of Poland touching their interest in the goods in question; and saith
hee is a Protestant, and otherwise negatively:-

To the second hee saith the goods schedulate were all in trunks boxes and
bailes marked as in the schedules, and made up with Cords, and the
trunkes locked up as hee beleeveth

To the third hee saith hee was present at and gave order for the lading of all
the said respective parcells aboard; but saw not the packing of them up they
being sent ready packed up from Paris and Roane to this depent at Diepe, together
with a List of the goods, according to the schedule annexed to the allegation:-

To the 4th hee referreth himself to the said schedule. And saith that the
silkes interrate were for the use of the said King and Queen,
and for some of their Court. And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the 5th hee saith hee was not present at the seizure of the said shipp or
at the time of the plunder interrate, and therefore cannot depose:

To the 6th hee saith, That all the goods schedulate were laden for the accompt
of the King and Queene of Poland, and were to be used by them their
domestiques and the religious persons aforesaid, and were not at all to be
transported as Merchandizes, but as goods designed as aforesaid

To the 7th hee saith, hee is a Native of Amsterdam, but departed thence
in his infancy. and hath lived at Roane for 20. yeares last and upwards, and
is a Subject to the King of ffrance.:-

G. DATTI?VORS [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The same day:-

Examined upon the same Allegation:-

2:us.

John Conyet of Chambory in Savoye
Gentleman aged 26 yeares or thereabouts a
Witnesse sworne and examined saith and deposeth
as followeth, Videlicet

That in or about the moneth of August last past the shipp the Saint
George allegate was freighted at Diepe by this deponents precontest, ffactor
to the King and Queene of Poland for the transortation of certaine Religious
persons ffryers and Nunnes and their attendants into Poland and some servants belonging to the Queene aforesaid With severall
bailes of goods, and truncks packed up, with divers necessaries for the use
of the said religious persons being such things as were requisite for their
vestments relligious habits utensills and ornaments for a Religious House and
a Chappell appointed for them in Poland by the King and Queene aforesaid
who as this deponent then understood by the ffather director of the said religious
persons had all of them beene bought by the especiall direction of the said King
and Queene for their owne use or for their domestique servants, and for the use
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.163v Annotate
and service of the said religious persons, and their Attendants being all or most of them natives of Savoy, or of Burgundy under the dominion of the King of Spaine some of
which this deponent saw packed up at Roane, namely 5. or 6. bailes or bundles
of quilts, a Case of white earthen ware, a trunck with bookes and Cloathes
belonging to the said director and another baile of bookes, linnen, artificall
flowers and other inventions, which from thence were transported to
Diepe aforesaid, and there imbarques in the said shipp the Saint george, and
the rest of the said bailes and trunkes were brought from Paris thither
for the use above specified, but what was contained therein; this deponent
knoweth not; saving as hereafter declared And saith that the said shipp was and is commonly
accompted a Hamborough shipp and the Master thereof John Peterson
Griep was and is accompted a Hamburgher And the King and
Queen of Poland and the religious persons aforesaid were and are persons
in amity with this Commonwealth, And beleeveth That the said Relligious
persons according to the Civill Customs of fforraigne Countries are priviledged and
ought to passe freely withiout searching or interruption in their travells
Yet notwithstanding such their freedoms the said persons were by them
said seizors treated in a most uncivill and violent manner, notwithstanding that the said
Master and others Gentlemen and passengers showed unto them the letters
of safe conduct of his said Majestie of Poland and gave them a full
accompt of the designe, desiring them not to interrupt their passage or
to injure or abuse them as they did. And saith that the said ffather
Directors trunke with his bookes cloathes and goods to the valew of about
2. hundred french Crownes, the trunke of one Monsieur Blanchart secretary
to Monsieur des Esarts Superintendent to the Queene of Poland or some other
persom of great quality Attendant upon the said Queene to the valew of
about 200 ffrench Crownes, the portmantle of one Mr de La [?Lane]
Comptroler to the Queene of Poland, to the valew of about 100: li
sterling, two trunkes belonging to one Monsieur Mantevle a Polonian Gentleman worth about
450: li sterling: and severall other goods as rings jewells, moneyes, linnen,
silver scales, and silver crosses of a very great valew, but the particular
valews this deponent knoweth not, were violently plundered and taken
away by the said seizors, and by certaine souldjers who come aboard the said shipp
in the haven of Dover The premisses hee deposeth, being an attendant upon
the said ffather director and designed to goe a passenger in the said Vessell
for Poland, and present at the lading of the said Vessell at Diepe
as aforesaid, and at the seizure and plunder of her, and the religious psons
and passengers aboard her, as is predeposed. And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the Crosse Interries [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith, That hee cometh on the behalf of the said religious
persons and by the persuasion of the said ffather director to declare the
trueth of his knowledge in this Cause, and saith hee hath a bagg in the said
shipp with wearng cloathes linnen and other necessaries for his owne use, And
saith hee is a Roman Catholique. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.164r Annotate
To the second hee saith, That the goods so laden at Diepe by his premisses
for the use afoesaid were all in trunkes boxes and packs made up and
tiede with Cords, and locked as hee beleeveth.

To the third, hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And further cannot
depose, saving that the said ffather director and some of the said Nunnes
at Diepe acquainted this deponent that severall of the goods mentionned in the
schedule anneyed to the Allegation were in the bailes and trunkes then laded
aboard the said shipp.

To the 4th hee saith, That at such time as by vertue of a Commission from this
Court the goods interrate were searched at Dover, this deponent being present
saw about two whole pieces of linnen, some whole peeces of sattin and taffetas
which as this deponent hath been severall times informed both by the said ffather
director and others of the Religious persons were for the use and accompt of the said
King and Queene and for their domestiques, and for the use and ornament
of the Chappell of the said Religious psons:-

To the 5th hee saith, hee knoweth not nor beleeveth that any thing plundered out
of the said vessell is restored, And otherwise referring himselfe to his foregoing
sepon hee saith heee cannot depose:

To the 6th hee saith by vertue of his oath, hee dooth not know nor beleeve, that
any of the goods laden on the said Vessell were for the accompt of ffrenchmen
or ffrenchwomen, subjects of the King of ffrance, the said Religious persons
being all of them Subjects of the King of Spaine or Duke of Savoye; And saith
this deponent knoweth not nor beleevth that any thing in the said shipp was to bee
transported in the quality of Merchandize:-

To the 7th hee saith hee this deponent is Native of Chambery in Savoye, and
a Subject to the Duke of Savoy, and hath lived at Chambery a foresayd as a Traveller and Student at
Turin, in Piemont, and other places in Italy and Paris in ffrance for theise ten yeares last past or
thereabouts

A: Cugnet [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin:-
----
The 24:th day of October. 1653:-

Examined upon the sayd Allegation

3.:us

John Pieterson Griep of Hambourough, Mariner Master of the said shipp the Saint
George aged 43 yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined saith and deposeth as followeth vizelicet

That in the moneth of August last past this deponent entred into a Contract of Charterpartie
with his precontest George Dattivort ffactor to his majesties of Poland; Which sayd ffactor
freighted this deponents said shipp at Diepe in ffrance for the transportation of
certain religious persons ffryers and Nunnes and their Attendants from thence
to Dantzick, And that all the said shipps lading (except a parcell of about
sixtie Cases of glasse, and five tonnes of Vinegar belonging to this deponent
and Mariners of his said shipp most of which glasse is broken and spoyled
by the seizors of the said shipp as this deponent hath credibly heard consisting of severall bailes and trunkes
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.164v Annotate
goods which according to the said Charterpartie were all laden by the
said ffactor on board the said shipp for the accompt and Risico of his said
Majestie of Poland and were to be transported from thence to Dantsick aforesayd
for the use of the said King and Queene of Poland and their [?XXXX=]
ques, and for the use of the said religious Persons for their Religious
habits Vestments and Ornaments of their Chappell, as the said
ffactor at the time of the firming of the said Charter partie, and lading
of the said bailes and trunkes aboard told and declared to this deponent
And saith his said shipp is a Hamburgh shipp and hath belonged to that
Port for about 28 yeares of this deponents knowledge, and this deponent
is a Hamburgher and his said shipps Companie consisteth of three
mariners out of the land of Holsteyn, and three frenchmen, And the
King and Queene of Poland and all the rest of the persons interressed
in the goods in question were and are as hee beleeveth persons in
amity with this Commonwealth, And saith hee hath Credibly heard
that since this deponents said shipp ws seized by Captaine Hutton
and Companie, they the said Captaine and his men have very unci=
villy and unworthily treated the said Religious Persons and their
Attendants, and have plundered them to a very considerable valew.
Notwithstanding that this deponent and others the Gentlemen and
Passengers aboard showed the said Captaine and Companie their
letters of safe Conduct from the said King of Poland and desired
them not to interrupt or distrub them in their intended Voyage
being free persons, and such against whom they had nothing [?XXX]
to pretend. And otherwise referring himselfe to his said Charterparty
not being present or seeing the plunder aforesaid, by reason he was
detained prisoner aboard the said Huttons man of warr hee saith
hee cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories/

To the first hee saith, hee cometh of his owne accord to declare the
trueth of his knowledge in this Cause, and saith hee is a Protestant
And otherwise referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition./

To the second hee saith, That all the goods laded aboard his said shipp by
his precontest according to Charterpartie were and are all in bailes and [?parcells]
bound up with Cords And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the third hee saith, hee was not present at the packing of any part pf
the goods in question. And further cannot depose:/

To the 4th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the 5th negatively, for asmuch as hee was on board the man of warr
when the said shipp and persons were plundered/

To the 6th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.165r Annotate
To the 6th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And otherwise
cannot depose, Saveing there were no goods aboard the said shipp to be
transported in the same in the nature of Merchandizes, save onely the
glasses and vinegar predeposed, all the rest of the goods being Laden for
the said King and Queenes accompt, and for the service of the said
religious persons and their attendants, and other passengers havinge relation
to the King and Queene aforesaid:

To the 7th hee saith hee is a Hamburgher borne, and a Subiect of that
ffree State, where hee hath lived ever since his infanca

XXX XXXXXX His signature

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin:-
----
The 26th day of October .1653:-

The Clayme of Lawrence da Geer and others)
for the shipp the Land of Promise, (Dowen)
Borkes Master) and the goods in the same Suck: Budd)

Examined upon an Allegation on the behalfe of
the said Claymer:/

d.t Crusoe.

j.us/

Dorve Bockes of Nortropen in Swethland
Mariner Master of the said shipp the Land of
Promise aged 36. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined/.

To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, as also to the
schedule thereunto annexed that hee hath knowne the ?arlate Lawrence de Geer
and ffrancis ffineman Subjects of the Crowne of Sweden for about 14 yeares last
past, and saith, That about a yeare agoe the said Lawrence de Geer at
Amsterdam bought the shipp the Land of promise arlate for his owne accompt
and for the accompt of the said ffrancis ffineman joynt Owner of the same with the
said Lawrence de Geer, and for such Owners the persons predeposed are commonly
accompted reputed and taken, Which hee knoweth, being in or about the moneth
of November in the yeare 1652, Which hee knoweth, being in or about the moneth
of November in the yeare 1652 Constituted Master of the said shipp by the said
Lawrence de Geer at Amsterdam, in his owne name and in the name of the said ffineman.
And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving hee beleeveth the schedule arlate to be
a true Copie of the Originall bill of sale made for the said shipp according to the
contents thereof, and saith it is usuall and often practized beyond the seas to
make sales of shipps by Notariall Instruments which are there accompted
sufficient and legall transports/:

To the second hee saith, That in or about the moneth of November 1652. the
said Lawrence de Geere gave order to this deponent to conduct the said shipp
with her then lading of herring from Amsterdam to Norropen in Sweden,
where shee arrived in the same moneth, and there received her present
lading of Copper wire and deale boards to be transported from thence to
Roane in ffrance for the account of the said Owners of the shipp and of Adrian
Tripp of Nort Copen Which hee knoweth being as aforesaid Master
of the said shipp, and having the Conduct of her for all the time predeposed. And
otherwise saving his following deposition hee saith hee cannot depose:-

To the third hee saith, That the said shipp and her ladeing being about 10
(moneths
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.165v Annotate
moneths since in their direct Course for Rouane in ffrance, by reason of
contrary windes were forced to putt into the River of the Maze in
Holland where they have continued for about 7 moneths last past in
expectation that the shippe and Merchandizes belonging to Sweden might
in regard of the amity between this Commonwealth and that Nation nee
permitted by the English to passe without disturbance or seizure, which this
deponent then feared being informed of Swedish shipps brought up and
staidd in England, And saith That upon the second of August last past by
order of the said Lawrence de Geer and ffrancis Heyeman this deponent with the said shipp and
lading sett sayle from the Maze towards Rochell in ffrance, and being
in her Course thitherwards was upon the 4th of the said moneth seized by a fflemmish man of warr and
by him brought into the Port of Dover, where after the Company of the said
man of warr had taken out the Swedish Certificates and passports
belonging to the said shipp and ladeing, they left her and her goods
remaining:- The premisses hee knoweth being as aforesaid Master of the
said during shipp all the time predeposed and thereby well acquainted with all the passages
predeposed. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 4.th hee saith, That after the said Vessell was so bought at
Amsterdam as aforesaid, shee became a Swedish Vesselll, and belonging to the
Subjects of the Crowne of Sweden, and sailed onely under the Swedish colours
which were aboard her at the time of her seizure aforesaid. and the said
ffineman and Adrian Tripp also Merchants and inhabitants at
Nortropen in Sweden, and they and the said Lawrence de Geer all
Subjects to the Crowne of Sweden, and for such commonly accompted, And
saith the said Laurrence de Geer for about 4 yeares last past hath
resided in Holland as Agent to the Queene of Sweden and is generally
knowne and observed so to bee, The premisses hee knoweth being as
aforesaid Master of the said shipp, and a Burgher of Nortropen aforesaid
And otherwise referring himselfe to the Records of this Court hee saith
hee cannot depose./

To the 5.th hee saith, hee this deponent is as aforesaid a Burgher of
Nortropen in Sweden, and a Subject to that Crowne, and so generally
knowne to be for about 14 yeares last past, onely his wife not having
her health in Sweden, by speciall permission of the Queene of Sweden given
hee hath for some time resided with his said wife at [OsXXX]
in Holland. Which hee deposeth of certaine knowledge:-/

To the 6.th and schedule annexed hee saith, That the said schedule is a
true Certificate of the entry of the shipp and lading now reclaymed
made in the Sound, and is such a passe as
is usually granted onely by the Danes themesleves unto the Swedes, there being in
such no mention of toll received, or any seale thereunto, as is usuall in the
passes granted to the Subjects of other Nations, and saith that such is the
priviledge of the Swedes in the Sound, upon an Attestation brought from
the Magistrates of that place of Sweden from whence they came, and so much
hee saith is usually and generally knowne amongst Merchants, as hee
beleeveth. The premisses hee declareth for the reasons predeposed And
further cannot depose./

To the last hee saith his foregoing deposition is true./

(To the Interrogatories
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.166r Annotate
To the Interrogatories/

To the first hee saith hee hath no part in the shipp or goods interrate
And otherwise referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition:

To the 2. negatively/

To the 3. hee saith hee is a Native of Osana in Holland where hee hath had
his wife and family for about 2. yeares last past, and saith the said shipp
was furnished to Sea by the sad Lawrence de Geer at Amtserdam, and by
the said ffrancis ffineman from Nortcopen, and that hee hath as yet given
no accompt of the said ships voyage, And otherwise referreth himselfe
to his foregoing deposition/

To the 4:th hee saith the interrate ffrancis ffineman was not at Amsterdam at
the buying of the said shipp, And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee
saith hee cannot depose./

To the 5th hee saith the said shipps Companie consisted of this deponent a Subject of
Sweden, his Stiersman an Amsterdamer, two other men Easterlings, and a boy
of Holland, And otherwise negatively:/

To the 6. hee saith the said shipp the Land of promise came as aforesaid from the Maze in Holland
two daies before her seizure/ And otherwise negatively/

[?doulbey ?XXXheuse van noortcoppen] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The same day.
Examined upon the sayd Allegation

2us/

Cornelis Cornelison of Amsterdam in Holland
Mariner Stiersman of the said ship the Land of
Promise aged 50. yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined./

To the first and second and schedule annexed hee saith, That about a yeare since the arlate
Lawrence de Geere Commissary or Agent for the Queene of Sweden did at
Amsterdam buy the said shipp the Land of Promise, and was and is commonly
accompted the principall owner thereof, and that shortly after the buying
thereof the said Lawrence de Geer sent the said shipp from Amsterdam to
Norcopen in Sweden with about 14. or 15 lasts of herring under the command of his precontest where shee
shortly after arrived and delivered the same, and there tooke in her present
ladeing of Copper wire and deale boards to be transported from thence to
Roane in ffrance, ffor the accompt, as hee beleeveth and hath Credibly heard, of
the said Lawrence de Geer and his partners. Which hee deposeth being as aforesaid
Stiersman of and belonging to the said shipp ever since shee went from
Amsterdam for Norcopen as aforesaid And otherwise cannot depose./

To the third hee saith that the said shipp with her ladeing being directly
bound from Nortcopen for Roane as aforesaid were by contrary winds necessitated to sett in
to the River of the Maze in Holland about 10 moneths since, where they
have remained ever since in regard of the troubles at Sea, till that upon the
second of August last they sett saile from thence bound for Rochell in ffrance,
and upon the 4:th of the same were seized by a man of warr of fflanders and
brought  up by him into Dover Roade, where, after the said mann of warrs Company
had taken away the said shipps papers, they left and deserted her and her
(lading
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.166v Annotate
lading which hee knoweth for the reasons predeposed. And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the 4th hee saith, That after the buying of the said shipp by the said
Lawrence da Geer shee became a Swedish Vessell, and sailed under the
Swedish Colours onely, and had them and no other aboard at the time of her late seizure.
And saith the said Lawrence da Geere for about 5. yeares last of
this deponents knowledge hath dwelt at Amsterdam as an Agent for the
Queene of Sweden, whose Subject hee is, and for such generally knowne
and taken, Which hee deposeth being as aforesaid Stiersman of the said
shipp, and Inhabitant of Amsterdam, And otherwise referring himselfe
to the Records of this Court hee cannot further depose:-/

To the 5th hee saith, That the interrate dowe Bo[?c]kes his precontest
was and is commonly accompted a Burgher of Nortropen, and Subject of
Sweden, and that his wife now liveth at Osana nere Amsterdam, where
his said precontest hath also lived for some time of late, by an especiall
permission of the said Queene, (as this deponent hath credibly heard) by
reason his said wife had not her health in Sweden. And further cannot
depose./

To the 6th and schedule annexed hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the
said schedule, but hath Credibly heard That the Swedish Nation have
a peculiar priviledge in the Sound more than the shipps of other Nations

To the 7th hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee hath no part or interest in the said shipp or
lading, And otherwise referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition./

To the second negatively:-

To the third hee saith, that the said dowe Borkes is a hollander borne
and hath kept his wife and family at Osana for about 2 yeares last past
And further referreth to his foregoing depositions./

To the 4th hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 5th hee saith there was but one Master of the said shipp at the
time interrate, videlicet this deponents precontest who is as aforesaid a Subject
to the Queene of Sweden, this deponent is an inhabitant of Amsterdam but borne at Sweden in the Eastland [?to]
Easterlings, and one boy of Osana in Holland, who are all the said shipps
Companie, and saith they had one holland Colours aboard at the time of
their late seizure.

To the 6. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise
negatively.

Repeated before the Judges in Court./

[?Cornelis ?Conrnelisson]  [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 31th day of October 1653.

The Clayme of don Sebastian Cortizos etcetera.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3.

Antonio Fernandez Corvaisall of the Citty of London
merchant aged fifty four yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.167r Annotate
To the first second and third Articles of the sayd Allegation This deponent
saith and deposeth That for about theis seven yeares now past he hath
had and still hath Correspondence with the arlate Don Sebastian de
Cortizos and therby knoweth that for all that tyme he hath bene and is
an Assentista of his Catholique Majesty the King of Spaine, and so accounted
And saith that he this deponent in or about the beginning of Aprill last
past receyved a letter from the producent dated at Madrid 25th ffebruary
1653 new stile wherein he certifyed this deponent that he had caused to
be laden att Allicant aboard the sayd shipp Saint Augustine. 120 sackes of
wooll in part for the paying and satisfying 530 thousand Crownes whereto hee
had engaged himselfe to the sayd King of Spaine, to be transported
to Venice and there delivered to the arlate Augustin ffonseca whom
he had ordered to draw bills for payment of part of the sayd moneyes
to be made of the proceed of the sayd wools to the King of Spaines
Ambassador Residing here at London, and to remitt the remaynder of
the proceed of the sayd woolls by bills of exchange payable in fflanders
for the affayres and occasions of the sayd King there. which letter he
saith was and is a Reall and true letter, and he verily beleiveth that the
Contents thereof were and are true, and therefore, and for that he
well knoweth that the producent doth usually once a yeare send from Allicant
to Venice severall great quantityes of wool yarn upon his owne Accompt
for supply of the sayd Kings occasions he is firmly assured that in January
ffebruary and March 1652 English stile, and March Aprill and May
1653. the sayd producent was and now is the sole owner and lawfull proprieto:r
of the 120 sackes of wooll now in question, and that he did by his factors
lade the same for his owne Accompt upon the sayd shipp att Allicant abozr
January or ffebruary last past and consigned the same to be delivered to his
Correspondent Augustin de ffonseca att Venica for the foresayd Accomot for
supply of the occasions of his Catholique Majesty as aforesayd. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith he hath credibly heard that the sayd
shipp together with the wools aforesayd aboard her was in her Course from
Allicant to Venice seized by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth under
the Command of the arlate Captaine Badily whereby the sayd wools came
into his the sayd Captaines possession, which he beleiveth to be true. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that
the sayd Sebastian da Cortizes was and is a Spaniard and inhabited in madrid
and so hath done for 20 yeares and upwards by common repute , and was and is a
subiect of the King of Spaine and so accounted, and hath heard that the
sayd Augustin da ffonseeca is a Spanaird residing in Venice where he hath
lived for many yeares. And further referring himselfe to his foregoeing
depositions he cannot depose. saving that he this deponent hath heard the Lord
Ambassador of Spaine here Resident say that he had order from the King
of Spaine to looke after the restitution of the sayd 120 baggs of wooll
and saving that for the reasons predeposed whereto he referrs he is well
assured that noe subiect of the States of the united Provinces or of the ffrench
King, had or hath any share or interest in the sayd woolls or any part thereof.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.167v Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. negatively.

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the producent by corresponencyes 7.
or eight yeares. and he is a Spaniard by common repute having his family
in Madrid where he hath lived by like repute all or most of his tyme
and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he saw not the sayd woolls bought. and referring himself
to his foregoeing depositions cannot further depose.

To the .4. he saith he was not att Allicant when the woolls were laden. and
otherwise cannot depose, saving that the sayd woolls were laden as is
sett forth in the letter above mentioned by ffrancis Jaspar Mexicha

To the .5. negatively.

To the 6. negatively.

To the .7. he saith he is a native of Lisboa and an Inhabitant of London
and otherwise negatively.

To the .8. 9. 10. and 11th Interrogatories he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

Repeated before doctor Clarke)
and doctor Godolphin)

Anto XX CaraXXX [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 31:th day of October 1653.

The Clayme of fferdinando Numez merchant)
of Sevill for his goods and merchandizes)
in the shipps the Saint George John Martins)
Captaine, and in the shipp Salvador Christian)
Cloppenbergh Captaine taken by some of)
the Parliament ffleet)
Budd Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd fferdinando Numez.

1.

Antonio Estevan de Balderas of Madrid
an Inhabitant of Limma in the Indies
merchant aged thirty eight yeares or thereabouts,
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that the arlate fferdinando Numez a merchant of Sevill well knowne
to this deponent for theise 25 yeares now past or thereabouts in the monethes
of July August and September 1652 was and att present is the Lawfull
Owner and proprietor of the arlate forty six sackes of Lambes woole
unwasht of the first marke in the margent, and of the arlate

'D' [FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

one hundred and ten sackes of washed wools of the second marke
in the margent, And that in or about the month of July 1652 the

'R' [SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

sayd producent did att Cadiz cause the same to be Laden for his owne
accompt aboard the shipp Saint George whereof John Martinsdorp was
Master to be transported to Ostend and there delivered for his use to
his Agent or Agents there the premisses he knoweth to be true for
that about the beginning of the sayd month of July being att Sevill
he there saw the foresayd woolls in the quiet and peaceable possession
of the producent, and then and there heard him say and declare that
the same were his owne goods and that he would transmitt the same
for his owne Accompt to fflanders, and saw him then putt the same
into barkes to be carryed to Cadiz and there shipped, and afterwards
being att Cadiz saw the foresayd barkes whereon the sayd woolls were putt
safely arrive att the shipp of the sayd Martindorp riding att an anchor
in the bay of Cadiz and hath since seene bills of lading for the
sayd wools firmed with the hands and firme of the sayd John Martinsdorp
with whose character and manner of writing this deponent is well
acquainted. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.168r Annotate
To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that it being
the Custome to signe three bills of lading all of one tenor for each parcell
of goods, and this deponent  having well veiwed the two bills of lading
to the allegation annexed which, by the knowledge he hath of the sayd John
Martins manner of writing, he is well assured are firmed with the
handwriting of the sayd John Martins, and having seene two other
bills of lading for the sayd woolls of the same tenor with the sayd bills of
lading to the allegation annexed and now shewne him respectively, for these reasons
he is as he saith firmely perswaded and verily beleiveth that about
the day of the date of the sayd bills of lading the foresayd
John Martins dorp did signe three bills of lading all of one tenor
for the sayd unwasht woolls, and three bills of lading all of one tenor
for the sayd washed woolls, and that two of the sayd bills of lading
of each parcell one came along with the sayd woolls and came into the hands of the Takers
and by them were sent into the Registry of this Court. and that the contents
of the foresayd bills of lading were and are true. And otherwise
he cannot depose

To the fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
sayd shipp Saint George as he hath credibly heard and verily beleiveth after
the lading of the sayd woolls departed from Cadis and in her Course to
Ostend was seized together with the sayd woolls therein by some of the
shipps of this Commonwealth whereby the sayd woolls came into the possession
of the Takers, and that the sayd producent did and doth runn the sole
hazard and adventure thereof. and otherwise saving his foregoeing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
ffardinando Numez was and is a merchant of Sevill in Spaine and
there hath lived .25. yeares of this deponents knowledge, and by common
repute all or the greatest part of this time, and is a Spaniard borne and
a subiect of the King of Spaine and so accounted. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. negatively.

To the .2. he saith he knoweth the producent and so hath done 25. yeares and
saith he saw him putt the woolls aforesayd into barkes att Sevill but did not see
him at Cadiz./

To the 3. he saith the sayd woolls were carryed aboard by a factor of the
producent, whose name he knoweth not, and this deponent saith that he
saw the sayd woolls in the producents possession att Sevil as aforesayd.

To the .4. he referreth him selfe to his foregoeing deposition and further
cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith he saw not the sayd wools bought. and otherwise saving
his foregoeing depositions whereto he referreth he cannot depose.

To the 6. he saith he was not present att the signeing of the bills of lading interrate

To the .7. he saith the bills of lading now shewne him are as he beleiveth
true and reall, and further he cannot depose.

To the 8 and 9. he saith the wools were laden by the producents order but
not by himselfe in person, but by his agent or factor and otherwise being not
present aboard att the tyme of lading he cannot depose

To the .10. he knoweth nothing thereof

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.168v Annotate
To the 11.th negatively.

To the 12th. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and
further cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith he is a native of Madrid, and an Inhabitant of
Limma in the West Indies and otherwise negatively.

To the .14. he saith the producents factor att Cadiz whose name he
remembreth not did there acquaint this rendent for whose accompt
and Risgo the sayd woolls were laden videlicet the Reckoning and risko
aforesayd.

To the 15. 16. 17. and 18. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 19. negatively.

To the 20. 21. and 22th he saith that being not present att the tyme
of firming and delivery of the bills of lading interrate he cannot
depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

Anto. [?XXXXX]
el [?valdera] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Roger Kilvert [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges)
----
The fourth day of November 1653

The Keepers et cetera against the Lewis of)
Rochell.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4

John Greene of East Smithfeild in the County
of Middlesex Mariner late Captaine of the John and
Elizabeth one of the shipps imployed in the service
of this Commonwealth aged 44 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that This Commonwealth of England by the violence miscarriages and
irregular proceedings of the ffrench King and allso of the States
of the united Provinces and of their respective subiects that suffered
losse and dammage to a very great value. And there are universall
Reprizalls grannted against the ffrench and Dutch Nations for
Reparacion and satisfaction for the sayd dammages, and for that [?XXXX]
All shipps in the immediat service of this Commonwealth are authorized
and empowered to take and seize all shipps and goods att sea
belonging to the sayd ffrench King or States of the united Provinces
or their respective subiects. which he knoweth being sometymes
imployed in the service of this Commonwealth in their expedicions of
warr att sea. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the second third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot
depose./

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the [?place ?of]
ffrench fishing for whales is very farr to the North ypon the Coast
of Greenland and the direct Course from thence to Rochell in
ffrance or other ports of ffrance neeere thereto was and is by the
North of Ireland and that way the ffrench shipps using the
Greenland trade doe usually passe which he this deponent well
knoweth having severall tymes seene them passe that way, and
more especially the last yeare this deponent mett with [?XXXX]
Greenland ffleet of ffrench vessells off of the Lands End and
[?XXXX)
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.169r Annotate
well saw and observed that they made their Course homeward
by the North of Ireland and that they had not come through
the Channell, and saith the sayd ffleet did consist of about
four sayle and were assaulted by this deponent but escaped him
And he saith he knoweth the arlate place called the Holy Goland
and knoweth It is quite out of the way from Greenland to ffrance
especially to the Port of Rochell and other ports adioyning, and
he never kew or heard that any ffrench shipps came that way
from Greenland to ffrance, but hath often heard and severall tymes
seen and observed the Contrary videlicet that they have made the
Northerne Course as aforesayd. And saith that the Holy Goland neere
whereto, as is sayd the Lowisa was seized, was and is in the direct
way from Greenland to the Textell and Coast of Holland, and not
farr from thence, which he knoweth having severall tymes
bene att Greenland and being well acquainted with the Coasts of
Holland, and the passage from Greenland to those parts. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 6th 7. and 8.th articles of the sayd allegation Hee saith he knoweth notthing
thereof.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first he saith Mr Budd did on the behalfe of the Commonwealth
produce this Rendent as a witnes in this cause, which he saith noe
way concernes him. and further he cannot depose saving that he
did not belong to any shipp whereby the Lewis or Hunter or eyther
of them were seized.

To the second he esaith being produced as a witnes and sworne he
hath declared the truth so farr as he knowes. and otherwise cannot
depose.

John Gres[?CC] [SIHNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The fourth day of Noevember 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of fferdinando Numez et cetera)
for his woolls in the Saint George.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Antonio da Ponte of Tenariffa merchant aged
28 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that the arlate fferdinando Numez a merchant of Sevil in Spayne
whom this deponent hath well knowne for about 8 yeares now past
in the monthes of July August September and October 1652 was and
att this present is and ought to be the lawfull Owner of the arlate .46.
baggs of Lambes wooll foale and unwasht of the first marke

'D' [FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

in the margent, and of one hundred and ten sackes more of
washed woolls of the second marke in the margent, and so

'KR' [SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

accounted, and that he did cause the same to be laden aboard the
sayd shipp Saint George John Martin's Master riding att an anchor
neere Cadiz in the said moneth of July to be in the sayd
shipp
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.170r Annotate
To the .5. he saith he saw not the sayd woolls bought nor knoweth who bought
them, of whom or for what nor can give any further accompt touching
the propriety thereof than allready he hath hiven./

To the 6. he saith he was not present nor in sight when John Martins
did signe the sayd bills of lading.

To the .7, he saith he beleiveth the sayd bills of lading are true and
reall. for the reasons aforesaid. and further cannot depose.

To the 8. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .9. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesaid.

To the .10. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 11. negatively.

To the 12. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and
further cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Teneriffa one
of the Canary Islands. and otherwise negatively.

To the .14. he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the 15. 16. 17. and 18. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 19. negatively

To the 20/. 21. and 22.th he saith that being not present att the
signing and delivering of the sayd bills of lading he cannot
depose otherwise than he hath deposed

Don Antonio deponte
Ca[?h]illa y [?XXX XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam DelaPlace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the Judges.
----

The [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] day of November 1653

The Clayme of Andrew Creagh et cetera)
for his silver in the Saint Peter.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Nicholas Rice of Limmerick in Ireland merchant
aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first and the rest of the Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith and deposeth that he well knoweth the arlate Andrew Creagh
and Patrick Creagh and so hath done for divers yeares now past videlicet
the sayd Andrew Creagh ten yeares, and the sayd Patrick Creagh
16 yeares, and saith that the sayd Andrew Creagh was and is a native
of Corke in Ireland and is a merchant a young man living abroad
as a merchant stranger, and now is as this deponent hath heard
in the Virginia or some place thereabouts, and was and is a subiect
of this Commonwealth and so accounted. And the sayd Patrick Creagh
was and is a native of Limmerick in Ireland and so accounted and
liveth now in Ireland att or neer Limmerick, and was and is a
subiect of this Commonwealth and so accounted, and they nor eyther of
them was or is a  subiect of the States of the United Provinces or
ffrench King or any Prince or State in hostility with this Commonwealth nor
so accounted, And he further saith that being att Amsterdam in
August last and about the beginning of the sayd moneth he then and
there saw in the hands of John White a letter of advise sent from
David England of Bilboa who was and is a factor or Correspondent
of the producents wherein was certifyed that he the sayd David England
had att Bilboa laden aboard the sayd shipp Saint Peter a quantity of
moneyes for the Accompt of the sayd Andrew Creagh and another
parcell
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.170v Annotate
parcell of moneyes for the Accompt of the sayd Patrick Creagh, the
particular value or quantity of which moneyes this deponent remembreth
not, and that the sayd moneyes were consigned to him the sayd
John White to be delivered for the Accompt of the sayd Andrew and
Patrick Creagh att Nantes in ffrance, and that Thomas Martin,
meaning his precontest in this cause, came along with the sayd moneyes
in the sayd shipp from Bilboa And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the 1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause att the Request of Mr
daniel Arthur, and further, otherwise than negatively, saving his
foregoeing depositions, he cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith he is a Native of Limerick in Ireland and
not bound as he conceyveth to discover his Religion. and saith that
for the first seven of the last ten yeares he lived att Limmerick in
Ireland, and from thence about 3 yeares agoe went to Amsterdam
and there lived one yeare or thereabouts, and about 2 yeares agoe
went from thence to Biscay in Spaine and there lived a yeare or
thereabouts, and about a yeare agoe returned to Amsterdam where
he continued about .8. monethes, and from thence came thither
to London where he arrived about a moneth agoe and hath resided
continually ever since.

To the .3. he saith that the sayd Andrew Creagh for about 4 yeares
of the last ten yeares till about 8 or 10 monethes past resided att
Amsterdam as a merchant factor and for the sayd 8 or 10 monethes
past hath bene as he hath heard att Virginia or parts thereabouts. and
before tyme lived in Ireland. and Patrick Creagh for theis ten
yeares past hath lived att or neare Limmerick in Ireland. And the
sayd John White for theis 7 or eight yeares now past hath lived as a
merchant factor in Amsterdam where he is now marryed and liveth
with his wife. And before tyme he lived att Limmerick in Ireland
from his youth being a Native of the sayd place. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the 4. negatively to every part thereof./

To the 5 negatively

To the .6. he cannot depose otherwise than negatively./

To the 7. negatively./

To the 8 he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd

To the .9. he saith he is now goeing to live in Ireland, and further
otherwise than negatively he cannot depose.

To the .10. negatively.

To the .11. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .12. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd
and beleiveth that the letter by him predeposed of was true and
reall and not colourable.

To the .13. he saith about October 1651. the sayd Patrick Creagh sent
from the port of Amsterdam in a shipp named the Peter as he taketh [?it]
Daniel Harrad master a quantity of Copper and harlan stuffes of
the value of 200 li sterling or thereabouts to the sayd david [?lXXX]

To the 14th. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 15 and 16. he saith he cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.171r Annotate
To the 17.th he saith the sayd Daniel Arthur is an Irishman
a subiect of this Commonwealth hath resided here in London about 18.
monethes as he hath heard. and otherwise cannot depose.

Micho: Rlle
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3.

ffrancis Water of Limmerick in Ireland merchant
aged 33 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first and the rest of the Articles of the sayd allegation This
deponent saith he hath knowne the producent Andrew Creagh about
nyne yeares who is as he saith a native of Corke in Ireland and a subiect
of this Commonwealth and so accounted, and hath knowne the arlate
Patrick Creagh from a boy who is as he saith a Native of Limmerick in
Ireland, and is an Inhabitant of Limmerick and a subiect of this
Commonwealth and so accounted. And saith about 2 yeares now past of the
certayne knowledge of this deponent the sayd Patrick Creah did
send to David England his factor and Correspondent att Bilboa
from the Port of Amsterdam in the shipp Peter Daniel Holland master
a quantity of old Copper and some other goods of good value videlicet
200 li sterling or thereabouts, and ordered the sayd David England to remitt
the provenue thereof to John White of Amsterdam for Accompt of
him the sayd Patrick. and this deponent hath credibly heard and
verily beleiveth that the sayd England did remtitt the provenew
thereof in sylver by the Saint Peter Jacobson Seyle master for nantes from
Bilboa consigned to John White for the Accompt aforesayd, and that the
moneyes now in question seized in the arlate shipp the Peter were
and are , or a good part thereof was and is the foresayd provenue of
the sayd Copper and other goods. And further saving his subsequent
depositions he cannot depose and saving that the sayd white was and is
the factor of the sayd Patrick Creagh.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. he saith he comes to be a witnes by the meanes of Mr Daniel
Arthur. and further otherwise than negatively he cannot depos, saving
his foregoeing depoitions and saving that he is Cosin to the sayd Patrick
Creagh about the 4th degree of kinned.

To the .2. he saith he is a native of Limmerick in Ireland and is by
Religion a Roman Catholique, and hath for theis two yeares and halfe last past
lived as a merchant stranger in severall places, Hamburgh,
Amsterdam, Bilboa. Zealand and Saint Sebastian trading to and fro as
occasion happened, and resided last att Amsterdam about 2 monethes
and went from thence to Hamburgh in June last, and there stayed
2 monethes and came from thence to London about 10 weekes agoe
and hath here resided ever since, And otherwise cannot depose, saving
that all the rest of his tyme he hath lived in Limmerick.

To the third he saith the sayd Andrew Creagh for the most part of
theis 7 yeares past hath lived in Amsterdam, and Rochall as a merchant
stranger, and is now att Virginia. and dwelt before that in Corke
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.171v Annotate
and the sayd Patrick Creagh is an Inhabitant of Limmerick and so hath bin
all his tyme, and the sayd John White is an Inhabitant of Amsterdam
as a merchant factor and there hath lived 6 or 7 yeares and hath a [?wife]
there living with him; And the sayd producents are Bachilers.

To the 4. negatively.

To the .5. 6. an .7. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .8. he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd

To the .9. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd. saving
he saith he hath noe fixe habitation, but takes the advantage of
merchandize and trade from place to place as occasion serves.

To the 10. 11. and 12. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

To the 13. he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the 14. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and
cannot further depose

To the 15. and 16. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof saving hee
saith he hath heard the sayd Daniel Arthur say that he hath Order
to Clayme the moneyes in question.

To the 17. he saith. the sayd Daniel Arthur is a native of Limerick in
Ireland, and a subiect of this Commonwealth. and hath heard that he
hath bene in England upward of a yeare, and came from france
about 4 yeares since. And further cannot depose.

Francwater [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest)
before the Judges in Court).
----
The eighth day Of November 1653.

Phillip and Company against the shipp called the)
Saint John (whereof Joachem Mesters is master)
and against detcliffe Stolley Claes Luds and)
others Claymers comeing in for their)
Interest)
Smith ffranklin Suckly.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd detcliffe Stlley and others

.I.

Claes Vos of Hamburg merchant
aged three and twenty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith the said
shipp Saint John and her ladeing now in Controversy were in [?fact]
uniustly aas he conceyveth taken and seized by an English frigott
the name whereof or of the Captaine he knoweth not, in the moneth of
September 1656. last past which he knoweth being aboard the said
shipp at the tyme of seizure. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Article of the sayd allegation and to the schedule therein
mentioned this deponent saith That att the tyme of the seizure of the
sayd shipp as aforesayd there were on board the sayd shipp of the knowledge
and sight of this deponents everall papers and bills of lading for
and touching the Cargozone of goods laden aboard the sayd shipp but
how many in certaine he knoweth not, and having seene and
perused the schedule to the allegation annexed he saith that there [?were]
on board the sayd shipp the tyme aforesayd for the Accompt of the sayd
detcliffe Stolly 2 packes of peice goods of the first marke in the

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

margent, and 2 packes more and one small dry fatt of [?Peice ?goods]

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

of the second marke in the margent, for which sayd 2 packes
there were the tyme aforesayd two bills of lading aboard of different
tenors, videlicet one for the sayd packes of the first marke and one for the
sayd two packes and little fatt of the 2d marke, And saith that for
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.172r Annotate
after the said seizure one of the officers of the sayd frigat that
made the seizure who was as this deponent taketh it Purser of the
sayd frigott with 2 or 3 more of the frigotts Company with him came
aboard the sayd shipp the Saint John, and tooke away the foresayd bills
of Lading for the sayd Stollies goods and likewise many other bills
of lading for other parts of the sayd shipps Cargazon but how many
in certayne he knoweth not, and likewise severall letters and other papers
but how many in certaine he knoweth not, and the sayd Purser of the
frigott with others of the frigotts Company aforesayd kept the sayd bills
of lading and papers in their possession or otherwise disposed of them att their will and returned them to the Master of the Saint John aforesayd And further cannot
depose saving that being then aboard the Saint John aforesayd and seeing and well observing
that the saud Purser possest himselfe of the sayd papers and bills of
lading in manner as aforesayd he knoweth the premisses to be true.

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that there hath
bene sent into the Registry of this Court .12. bills of lading touching the
sayd Cargazon of goods by the seizers aforesayd, and noe more for ought that
this deponent hath seene or heard, and saith there are many still wanting
deteyned by the sayd seizers as he beleiveth but how many in certaine
he knoweth not, and amongst the rest of the foresayd 2 bills of lading for
the goods of Detcliffe Stolloe aforesayd. And further cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause by the advise
and direction of Mr ffrancklin one of the Proctors of this Court. and saith
he hath noe share or Interest in the sayd shipp or goods nor eyther or any
of them, and was a Passenger aboard the Saint John, but not of the shipps
Companie, and further cannot depose.

To the second he saith he can both write and read written hand, and speaketh
the ordinary tongue of Hamburgh being a dialect or kind of dutch
and further cannot depose, saving that he understandeth the dutch tongue.

To the third he saith the lading of the sayd shipp so farr as this Rendent
knoweth was and is Brandywyne and peice goods, which were all laden
att Roan in ffrance, and saith the sayd Stolloes goods above mentioned
were laden for his the sayd Stollyes accompt and adventure who is as he
saith an Hamburgher, and there liveth with his wife and Children, and
beleiveth the sayd goods laden aboard the sayd shipp were and are for the
most part of them if the growth or manufacture of ffrance And saith
he beleiveth that the whole shipps lading was and is for the Accompt
of Hamburghers. and further otherwise than negatively he cannot
depose.

To the 4. negatively to every part thereof for his owne part.

To the .5. he saith he first saw the bills of lading above mentioned att
sea aboard the Saint John, the foresayd bills of lading for Stollees goods aforesayd
which he first saw att Roane in ffrance. and saith he was aboard and
saw the Master of the Saint John deliver the bills of lading interrate
and other papers the particulars or Contents whereof he cannot sett
forth otherwise than as aforesayd, to one of the sayd frigots Company whom
he taketh to be the Purser of the frigot but knoweth not his name
and saith the sayd papers were so delivered inthe day tyme upon the
19th day of September 1653. in the sayd shipp Saint John off of Callis by the sayd Jochim
Mester Master of the Saint John, in the presence of this Rendent [?XXX Badlin] and others

To the .6. Interrogatorie he saith that there were severall bill sof lading aboard
the Saint John att the tyme of her seizure as aforesayd. but whether the 12 bills
of lading now shewne him be the very same, or some part of the
same he knoweth not, nor whether they were signed bu the handwriting
of the Master of the Saint John or his Purser. And further cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.172v Annotate
To the seventh Interrogatorie he saith that having perused the bill
of lading to the Interrogatories annxed together with other writings and
papers, he saith that 2 of the sayd bills videlicet one for the sayyd [?XX]
goods of first marke as aforesayd, and one other of the sayd [?SlXXXX]
goods of the second marke as aforesayd were and are two of the sayd
bills of lading aboard the sayd shipp Saint John att the tyme of jer [?seizure]
as aforesayd. And further saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot
depose.

[?Canss ?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clerke and Godolphin.

[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Christian Boldan of Hamburgh merchant
aged 36 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the 1. 2. and 3. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that he this deponent being a Passenger aboard the sayd shipp Saint John
att the tyme of her seizure thereby knoweth that the sayd shipp and her
lading were in fact seized upon the 19th day of September last past
by an English frigott the name whereof, or of the Captaine whereof,
he knoweth not, and that att the tyme of such seizure there was
aboard the sayd shipp a Sea breife udner the seale of the citty of
Hamborough and severall other writings, and amongest the rest
many bills of lading for all or greatest part of the merchant
Cargazon of goods, and that the sayd seabreife papers and bills
of ladeing were upon the same day delivered to the Purser of
the frigot that made the seizure, who with five or
six more of the sayd frigotts Company came aboard the Saint John and
that the sayd Purser having receyved the same kept them in his
possession or otherwise disposed of them att his pleasure, and
made not any returne thereof to the sayd Master of the Saint John
or any other concerned therein that this deponent knoweth beleiveth
or hath heard. And saith that having perused the schedule to the
sayd allegation annexed hee well knoweth that there were 2 packs

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

of goods aboard the Saint John att the tyme of seizure of the first marke

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

in the margent, and 2 packs and one fatt of goods of the second
marke in the margent, and that the same were for Accompt of
detcliffe Stollee of Hamburgh and that Claes Liees of [?Hamburgh]

[THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

had likewise aboard 6 packes of goods of the 3d marke in the
margent. but whether all the goods of the respective markes
schedulate were on board the sayd shipp or how many bills of
lading in all he knoweth not. And this deponent hath seene
about 12 of the bills of lading for part of the Cargazon of
goods of the sayd ship in the Registry of this Court, and
beleiveth that the rest are in the possession of the seizors or
some of them or others for and of their behalfe together with
the sayd seabreife and other papers. And further cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.173r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he was produced as a witnes in this cause by the advise
and direction of Mr ffranklyn an Mr Suckly two of the Proctors of this
Court, and saith he hath aboard the sayd shipp for his owne accompt
and Risgo two packes and oe sack or bagg of peice goods of the
marke in the margent according to a bill of lading for the same

'C.B.' [MARKE, LH MARGIN]

abiding in the Registry of this Court over and besides a valiza or
Cloakebagg with Cloathes and other necessaries; and saith he was a
Passenger aboard the Saint John but was not of the shipps Company, and beleiveth
the sayd shipps Company were all Easterlings the Cookes boy excepted who
was as he beleiveth borne in ffrance and otherwise negatively

To the 2d he saith he can write and read written hand and speakes and
understands High Dutch, Low dutch, and the Common tongue of Hamburgh

To the 3d he saith the Lading of the Saint John consists for the most part of
Brandewyne and peice goods, which are and were of the groweth, and
manufacture of ffrance, and were all Laden att Roane in ffrance
but for the Accompt of Hamburghers, and doth not beleive that any
french man or Dutchman subiects of the States of the United Provinces
or ffrench King had or hath any Interest or share therein, for that
before this Rendent came from Roane the Master of the Saint John did
seriously averr to this Rendent that all the sayd shipps Lading was for
the Reckoning and Riske of Hamburghers./ And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .4. negatively for his owne part.

To the .5. he saith he first saw the sayd bills of lading and papers interrate in the River of Roane
and was present when they were delivered to the Purser of the sayd english
frigot and saith he did not read the same nor knoweth the name of
him to whom they were so delivered, but saith he knoweth they were
the bills of lading touching the merchants Cargazon of goods this Rendent
having one bill of lading for his owne goods amongst them, and being
told by the sayd Jochim Mesters that the same were the true bills for the
sayd merchants goods, and that the writing aforesayd under the
seale of Hamburgh was his seabreife. and further saith that the sayd
Jocheim Mesters master of the Saint John delivered the sayd bills of lading
papers and writings to the foresayd Purser of the frigott uppon the sayd
19 day of September last past aboard the shipp Saint John aforesayd in the day
tyme att sea off of Calis in the presence of this deponent, his Contest
Claes Vos and four or five of the Company of the frigot and in
particular the Leivetenant of the sayd frigott, and others whose names
att present he remembreth not. and further cannot depose.

To the 6. Interrogatorie he saith that the 12 bills of ladeing now shewne
him remaining in he Registry of this Court were aboard the Saint John
att the tyme of seizure. and this deponent saw the sayd Jochim Mesters
Master of the sayd shipp signe one of them videlicet the bill of lading
for this Rendents owne goods as aforesayd att Roane, and he verily
beleiveth that the other .11. are likewise firmed with the proper
handwriting of the sayd Jochim Mesters. And otherwise he saith
he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.173v Annotate
TO the seventh Interrogtorie This Rendent saith that the bills of ladeing
sea breifes and papers now shewen him mentioned in this Interrogatorie
were as he beleiveth aboard the sayd shipp Saint John att the tyme of
her seizure, but whether those papers and writings together
with the forementioned 12 bills of lading were all the writings
that were on board the sayd shipp he cannot depose. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

Repeated in Court before
the Judges

[?Chreistyeere Boldan] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 9th day of November .1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3

Joachim Meesters of Hamburg mariner
master of the sayd shipp the Saint John aged
four and thirty yeares of thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
Saint John and her ladeing were in fact though uniustly taken and sized
by a Galliot commanded by the arlate Hollman a private Caper of
Captaine Phillips in the moneth of September 1653. which he
knoweth being Master of the sayd shipp Saint John. and otherwise cannot
depose./

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
tyme the sayd shipp was seized there was and remained aboard her two
sea briefes or safe passe ports one latin the other dutch under the seale
of the free State of Hamburgh and severall papers and writings and
amongst the rest 40. or 41. bills of lading for the merchants
goods aboard the sayd shipp, and particularly for the goods [?schedulate]
and for severall other goods, and also this deponents shipps [?booke]
wherein the particulars of the merchants goods and this deponents
owne Cargazon of goods were entred. And saith that the goods
schedulate were then aboard the sayd shipp videlicet. 30 peices of
Brandewyne for Andries Barrenbergh of the 1 marke in the

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

margent. 23 peices of the same of 2d marke for Court [?WerXXddX] [?XXX]

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

peices of the .3d. marke for Arrent Nellthens. 56 peices of the same

[THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

of the .4th marke for Rolloef Barenberg. 94 of the same of

[FOURTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

[FIFTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

[SIXTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

the 5th marke. for daniel Larount. 22 peices more of the 6 marke

[SEVENTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

for William Grassen. and .6. peices more for Jan dorveille of the 7.
marke in the margent. And allsp peice goods for Hans

[EIGHTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

[NINTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

Roevers of the .8. marke. more of the same for Arnold [?AmsXXXXX] [?of]

[TENTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

the 9 marke. more of the same for frances Walsh of the 10th marke

[ELEVENTH MARKE, LH SIDE]

more of the same for francis vander waadurg of the .11.th marke

[TWELFTH MARKE, LH SIDE]

more of the same for Hendrick van Haesdonck of the 12th marke

[THIRTEENTH AND FOURTEENTH MARKES, LH MARGIN]

more of the same for Geliam de labstraat of the 13. and 14 markes more of

[FIFTEENTH MARKE, LH SIDE]

the same for Jans Vermullen of the 15th marke. more of the same

[SIXTEENTH MARKE, LH SIDE]

for Jacob een ffrans Williams of the 16th marke. more of the same

[SEVENTEENTH MARKE, LH SIDE]

for Jan van Sprekeasen of the .17th marke. more for daniel [?deXXX]

[EIGHTEENTH MARKE AND NINETEENTH MARKE, LH SIDE]

of the .18. marke. more for Jurean Baeselaer of the 19 marke. [?more]

[TWENTIETH MARKE, LH SIDE]

for ffrances Williams of the .20. marke. more for Peter [?BeXXX]

[TWENTY-FIRST MARKE AND TWENTY-SECOND MARKE, LH SIDE]

of the 21th marke. more for Jacques Martyen of the 22 marke.
more
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.174r Annotate
more of the same for detiffe Stollee of the 23th marke, and more
for the same person of the 24 marke. and more for derick Woottens
of the 25 marke more for Isaac Vanstenhooven of the 26th marke
more of the like for Hans Rooviers of the 27th marke. more for Claes
[?Liees] of the 28th marke. and more of the like for Jurrean Beessalaer
of the 29th marke. And saith that he this deponent did deliver into
th hends and Custody of Jacob Gerston Purser of the said Galliot
who with the Leivetenant and 3 or 4 more of the sayd Galliot came
aboad the Saint John aforesayd after the seizure all the sayd seabriefes papers and writings and the sayd Purser kept
the same in his Custody and tooke the same with him to is owne howse
in dover together with this deponent and there disposed of the same
and delivered them not to this deponent back againe. And further
saving his subsequent depositions he cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith that having made search and enquiry in the Registry
of this Court for the sayd seabreifes shipp booke and bills of ladeing
he hath seene onely 12 of the sayd bills of ladeing, and beleiveth
the rest are in the hands of the sayd Purser or his Captaine or others his
Imployers or their Agents. And further cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he is produced as a witnes by direction of Mr ffranklyn
one of the proctors of this Court and hath 11/16 parts in the sayd shipp the
Saint John, and a small cargazon of goods for his owne accompt, that is to say .35.
peices of vinegar. 480 bundles of dying stuffe called [?womve] 492 Reames
of white paper. 53. grosse of Cards. and 40 dosen of earthen platters
and one small packett with 16 pair of small stockins. and saith he
is master of the sayd shipp. and the sayd shipps Company were and are all
Easterlings one french boy excepted and none of them were or are Hollanders
or subiects of the States of the United Provinces And further he cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatory he saith he can write and read written hand and
speakes and understands high dutch and low dutch, and speakes a little
broken English, and broken ffrench. And further cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith the mayne Cargazon of the Saint Johns Lading is brandewyne
and peice goods and the same were laden att Roane in ffrance for the
Accompt of Hamburghers some of whose names are above sett forth
and for the rest he referrs him selfe to the bills of lading for the sayd
goods remaining in the Registry of this Court, and he beleiveth the sayd
shipps lading is of the growth and manufacture of ffrance, and saith the
same is all of it for the sale Reckoning and Riske of Hamburghers
and otherwise negatively.

To the 4th negatively for his owne part.

To the .5. he saith he first saw the foresayd seabreifes att Hamburgh and
the sayd bils of lading and other papers att Roane. and the bills of
lading this deponent himselfe did firme att Roane, and this Rendent
delivered the same as aforesayd to Jacob Gerson Purser of the sayd Galliot
about ten of the Clock in the day tyme upon the 19th day of September
last aboard the sayd shipp Saint John att sea off of Callis in the presence of
the Leivetenant of the foresayd Galliot and his precontests Christen Bolden
and Claus Vos, and severall other Passengers and others whose names
particularly he rembreth not.

To the 6. he saith the 12 bills of lading remaining in the Registry of this Court
now shewne him were all aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme of her seizure
and were all signed by the handwriting of this deponent.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.174v Annotate
To the 7 Interrogatory he saith that the seabreifes bills of lading and duXXX
papers now shewne this Rendent mentionned in this Interrogatory were aboard
the Saint John att the tyme of seizure aforesayd, and as for the CrXXXX
papers he knoweth not whether they were aboard or noe. nor can
positively sweare whether there were any other or more bills of lading
then aboard besides those and  and the 12 others formerly mentioned
but beleiveth they may be all, or if any be lacking it is but one or
two. And saith he cannot depose whether any other papers were aboard,
one principall paper excepted which he saith was aboard and delivered
to the sayd Purser, together with the rest and conteyned therein
the severall parcells of the goods, with the markes thereof, the
names of the Owners, and fraight due for the same, for the lack
of which paper which should be his guide he cannot as he saith
positively sweare whether any of the bills of lading for the
merchants Cargazon of goods be necessary or not.. And further
he cannot depose.

Repeated before doctor Clarke
and doctor Godolphin

Joachim XXXX [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The Keepers against the Lewisa etcetera

6.

Captaine Thomas Hare of Redriffe in the County
of Surrey Commander of the Ann Percy in the
service of this Commonwealth aged 32 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allon he saith that the Commander of
all shipps in the services and pay of this Commonwealth are authorised
to seize the shipps and goods att sea of the States of the united
Netherland Provinces and their subiects for ?XXpair of
dammages susteyned by this Commonwealth from that Nation. and somuch
he saith was and is notorious as he beleiveth. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the 2. 3. and 4th articles of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose

To fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he well knoweth
the place or Island called holygolandt which is north north ?East ?of
the ?Texell and not farr from ?thence and was and is in the ?common
course betwixt Greenland and the Coasts of Holland, and XXXXX
of the common course from Greenland and the adiacent XXX to XXX
and the ports therof, which he saith he the better knoweth for that
he hath severall tymes for many yeares together ?seene and
observed the common and ordinary Course of the ffrench Greenland
Company or ffleet of shipps that use to fish for whales in the saydd sea?s
and such that they usually fish farr off of Greenland towards
a place called GreenXXX, and have from tyme to tyme made
and taken their Course home for france by the North of Ireland
which is XXX X the nearest and readyest Course, and XXXX XXX
have
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.175r Annotate
have made or taken their Course through the English Channell nor
by the holygolandt or Texell which is as he saith farr about; And
saith he did never soe observe or heard though himselfe have used the
Greenland trade for 14 or 15 yeares, that the sayd ffrench ffleet or shipps
or ?any of them did do or come in those seas towards holygolandt or Texell, or that they
did att any tyme do or use to call or touch att the Texall to take in
Pilotts or for any other cause or reason, but knoweth and hath
seenne and observed that they have from tyme to tyme kept and made
the foresayd course by the North of Ireland in manner above sett forth.
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 6. 7. 8. and 9. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes CENTRE HEADING

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes att the Request of Captaine Jacob Reynolds
and expects noe benefit thereby. and further cannot depose

To the .2. he saith he useth noe endeavor to make the Lowisa and ?hunter or
their lading prize. and futher cannot depose.

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges)

Tho: Hare [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The xvth day of November 1653.

The Clayme of Blases da La Pyna)
of Sevill for his goods in the shipp)
the Salvador whereof Christian)
Cloppenbergh is Captaine taken by)
a shipp of the Parliaments fleet)
under the Command of Capt Pom[XXX])

Smith C[XXXXX]

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Blaza da La Pina.

.1.

Antonio Estevan de Balderas
of Limma in the West Indies merchant
aged 38 yeares of thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second third fourth fifth sixth seventh eighth and nynth
Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon his arrivall
in Spaine from the West Indies in the summer tyme 1652 during such
tyme or within such tyme as the arlate shipp the Salvador did lye att
Cadiz and more particularly about the monethes of August or September
1652 he this deponent being upon the Exchange in Sevill there
mett with the arlate Blaes da La Pina an ancyent acquaintance
of this deponent from his youth, And then and there this deponent
and the sayd Blaze da La Pina falling into discourse whereby he
came to understand this deponent resolution of goeing to fflanders
in some of the shipps then lyeing att Cadiz and bound for Ostend
, hee the sayd Blaes da La Pina thereupon tooke
occasion to acquaint this deponent in theis or the like words. videlicet
I (sayd he) doe likewise send eleven baggs of wooll upon my owne
accompt and Adventure aboard Christian Cloppenburgh to Ostend
meaning
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.175v Annotate
meaning and speaking of the sayd shipp the Salvador Christian
Cloppenburgh Master. for which cause and for that he this
deponent hath seene two bills of lading for eleven baggs of
wooll for the Accompt and Risqe of the sayd Blaes da La Pina ?being
firmed with the handwriting of the sayd Christian and annexed
to the allegation whereon he is now examined, and one in the Registry of
this Court upon the file of bills of Lading sent into the
Court by the Captaine that seized the sayd shipp and both of one
and the same tenor, he is firmly induced to beleive that the sayd
Blaze da La Pina was and is the Lawfull Owner of the eleven
baggs of woolls now claymed and that he did lade them aboard the
sayd shipp Salvador for his owne Accompt by himselfe or factors
to be transported to Ostend and there delivered for the same Accompt
and that the sayd Christian Cloppenburgh did signe three bills of
lading for the same all of one tenor according to the usuall Custome
and beleiveth that the sayd shipp in her Course from Cadiz to Ostend
was seized by the arlate Penrose or some other Captaine in one of
the frigots of this Commonwealth, and that the sayd woolls thereby came
to his possession. And further cannot depose saving he saith that of
his certayne knowledge the arlate Blaes da La Pina is a Spaniard
a subiect of the King of Spayne a merchant Inhabitant of Sevill
in Spayne and that he hath bene 30 yeares and upwards, and
was and is a merchant of good ranke using to trade betweene
Spaine and fflanders, and for and as such was and is
commonly accounted reputed and taken.

To the Crosse Interrogatories CENTRE HEADING

To the 1. negatively.

To the 2. he saith he knoweth the sayd Blaes da La Pina and so hath
done .30 yeares, and otherwise negatively.

To the .3. he saith the sayd Blaze de La Pina is a Spaniard and an Inhabitant
of Sevill and there hath lived with his family [STRUCK THROUGH: ten yeares and
upwards] And further cannot depose.

To the 4. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof, nor can depose any
otherwise than as aforesd

To the 5. he saith he was not present nor saw Christian Cloppenburgh
signe the sayd bills of lasing.

To the .6. negatively

To the 7. 8. and 9. and 10. he saith he was not present when the sayd woolls were
Laden. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .11th. negatively.

To the 12. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the 13. he saith he was borne in Madrid, and inhabiteth in
Limma in the West Indies. and otherwise negatively

To the 14. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesd.

To the 15. he saith he cannot depose

To the 16.. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 17 he saith he cannot depose

To the 18. he saith he cannot depose

To the 19. negatively.

To the 20. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the 21. he saith he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.176r Annotate
To the 22. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 23. negatively.

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Ant [XX XXXXX] de [XXXX deXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The xvth day of November 1653.

Captaine Phillips against the shipp the)
Hope of which Thomas Andreison is)
Master. Smith, ffrancklin Suckley.)

Examined upon an allegation given in made
and admitted in the Acts of Court on
the behalfe of harman Berens, Abraham
Vanderweeden and others of hamburgh

1

Thomas Andreison of Hamburgh Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Hope aged 46 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

That the allegat Harman Berens Abraham Vanderweedon and
Company [#]

[# LH MARGIN]
the heyres of Gerard Van Emren
the heyres of Albert
Blocke, the heyres
of Henrick Claeson
the heyres of Hans
Yong, Hans
Hopp, and this
Rendent

all Inhabitants of Hamburgh and subiects of the free
State thereof for 17 yeares last past or thereabouts have bene and
att present are the true and lawfull Owners and proprietors of the
sayd shipp the Hope and of her tackle apparell and furniture
and for and as such commonly accounted and reputed, And saith that
for and during the sayd tyme the foresayd shipp hath belonged to
the Port of Hamburgh and Hamburghers there living, and
that noe subiect of the King of ffrance or States of the united Provinces
during the sayd tyme or any part thereof had or hath any share or interest
therein or any part thereof. And moreover saith that the foresayd
shipp the Hope did in the moneth of Aprill 1653 last past sett sayle
from hamburgh freighted with severall goods and merchandizes
for Rohan in ffrance, and did there safely arrive about the beginning
of June last past and there delivered the sayd goods, and that the
sayd shipp was there reladen with the goods and merchandizes now
seized in her to returne for hamburgh, and was bound thither
onely and thither was directly goeing and to noe other Port or
plcae whatsoever and there alone and not elsewhere was to deliver
all her sayd Lading; All which this deponent knoweth having for
17 yeares now past continued and still being master of the sayd shipp.
And further saith That he this deponent about the tyme of the
Receipt of the sayd goods aboard his shipp did att Rohan by himselfe and his Purser signe divers
and sundry bills of lading for the sayd merchant goods now sezed,
and that the bills of lading
seized on board the sayd shipp were and are the bills of lading so
by him signed, and that
the same were and are true, and the goods in each particular bill of
lading mentioned were to be delivered att the place and to the persons
and for the Accompt in the sayd respective bills of  lading mentioned
and to noe other person att noe other place snad for noe other Accompt
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.176v Annotate
and  that he this deponent (nor his Purser nor any other [?XXXX]
behalfe so farr as he this deponent knoweth beleiveth or hath heard did not signe any other bills of lading of any
tenor for the sayd goods or any part or parcell thereof, [?And]
the sayd bills of lading nor any or eyther of them was or is [?false]
fraudulent or any wise colourable, but they all are reall and
true and so had and done according to the contents thereof
before the departure of the sayd shipp from Rohan all which
this deponent knoweth being privy to the signing and firming
of all the sayd bills of lading and acquainted with the contents
thereof by his Interpreter att Roane understanding and speaking the dutch and [?french ?tongues] and having signed and firmed many of them with
his owne handwritinge. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. he saith he hath 1/8 part and 1/16 part in the sayd shipp
and hath goods aboard for his owne Reckoning and of his foresaid owners in [?Common ?XX]
videlicet eighteen tonnes of vinegar, five hundred Reames of
paper and 2 Caskes of earthen ware; which he hopes will be
restored: And otherwise cannot depose./

To the .2. negatively.

To the 3. he saith that he this Rendent did underwrite or firme
some of the sayd bills of lading but not all; and those which
this deponent did so firme he firmed after the goods there[?in]
mentioned were laden and receyved aboard./

To the .4/ he saith that the principall of his outward lading
was woolls copper wire Copper sugar and leather but he remembreth
not the names of all the merchants that laded the same [?XXX]
he saith that the heyres of Joast Overbock did lade aboard a
good quantity of wooll and wire, and the heyres of Peter
Overbock severall parcells of woolls, and John [?Santinell]
severall quantityes of Copper, and this deponent did lade for
his owne Accompt some deale boards. And saith the whole [?Cargo]
of the outward lading was for the sole Accompt of Hamburgers
and this Rendent did receyve for the freight thereof of and
from the respective factors att Rohan to whom the goods were
consigned two thousand four hundred livres french [?accompt]
20 four to a livre, or thereabouts, and this Rendent left the
bills of lading for the severall parcells with the sayd factors [?XXX]
and saith hee had an entry of the sayd outward lading in a [?Roll]
which after the goods delivered and freight payd for the same
being then of lesse use was neglected and lost. And further
cannot depose.

To the .6. he saith he hath lived in Hamburgh 33 yeares or
thereabouts, and his dwelling howse is in the Keyrweden
and saith the names of the owners of the sayd goods their [?dwellings]
aged and Complexions so farr forth as this Rendent att present remembreth
are as followeth. videlicet ffrancis Wallich of Greene street Hamburgh
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.177r Annotate
a young man sanguine complexion and brown hair, Albert Wulfe
of Saint Catharine Street in Hamburgh a young man sanguine complexion
and browne hair. Marke Marten of Lubeck whom this Rendent knoweth
not. Michael Huisch of greene strete hamburgh middle aged and inclining
to gray haires. Abraham Ankelman of the domb Hamburgh middle
middle age black haire and complexion swarthy. Jean Roover
a youg man long browne hair fair complexion and ruddy living
in Hamburgh Jacob and ffrancis Williams of Reyners [?Tradden] Hamburgh
young men fair complexion and browne haire. Jurian Schoonman
of the Keirnader Hamburgh middle age inclining to gray. Jean
Chantemel of Burstall Hamburgh. an old man and gray. Bernand
Berneten of dantzyck whom this deponent knoweth not. Marke Luc[?e]
of Spessort Hamburgh. middle age and browne hair and complexion something
swarthy. Reynard de Leuvin of Becker street in Hamburgh. middle
age white hair and sallow complexion. Joachim Master of the
Keyreweder a young man whitish complexion and browne haire
Joan van Sprequelson of Cramone Hamburg. of middle age whitish
complexion and browne hayre. Jan vermeulen of the Wantram Hamburgh
a young man whitish hair and fair complexion. Isaack Stegman
of drackwall straet Hamburgh middle age and browne haire. Caspar
Hougrat neere the barrs in Hamburg. middle aged, browne haired
and complexioned. Peter Bolein of the Wantram Hamburgh of middle
age fair complexion and browne hair. paul femond and Companie
of Nurenbergh who this Rendent knoweth not. Jan Baptista Jonker
of Greenstreet Hamburgh middle aged inclining to gray. George
Bettleer of the Wantrom Hamburgh middle age, browne hair and complexion
the heyres of Joos van Werbock of Ryck street Hamburgh all young
some men some women and all fair of complexion. Jacob [?dalbae]
by the barrs Hamburgh. middle aged browne of hair and complexion
David Hammal of Greene street Hamburgh. middle aged swarthy of complexion
and hair. ffrancis vander wild of Hamburgh a young man white hair
and sallow complexion. Daniel Dorville of the Rompsmart Hamburgh.
an elderly man inclining to gray. ffrancis Vandorl of [?bonestreet]
Hamburgh. a young man fair complexion and whitish hair. Jacques
Martin of Saint Catharine [?strad] Hamburgh. middle age browne hair and
complexion. Simon voche of green street Hamburgh a young man
swarthy complexion and black hayre. Dettliffe Stolly of [?bonestreet]
Hamburgh of middle age of browne hair. Dirck Cors of Saint John
street Hamburgh an elderly man of browne hair. Hans Bode of
the Wantcomb Hamburgh a young man fair complexion and white hair.
the widdow of Middledorp an ancient matron in the Grim Hamburgh.
Henry Hartman of Saint Catharine street Hamburgh middle age
fair complexion and browne hair. Jan Temminck of Ryck street
Hamburgh middle age sallow complexion and browne hair. Andreas
Bornberg of Saint Johns street Hamburgh an ancyent man all gray. dominq
van Dabe of Hamburgh middle age and browne complexion and hair
Paulus Bernbergh of Saint Johns street an ancyent man and gray
Jan Hansen Schaman by the Meurne Hamburgh middle age and
browne of hair and complexion. frederick Machell and hairs of
Michell Cazemill of Nurenbergh whom this Rendent knoweth not. Dirick
Wetgen of Nenburgh Hamburgh a young man fair complexion and browne
hair. Arnolt van Haesdonck of the Wantram in Hamburgh of middle
age
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.177v Annotate
age and browne complexion, and whitish hair, and saith
he cannot positively sweare how long he hath knowne every of
the foresayd persons being in Hamburgh but hath knowne some of them videlicet of the elder
sort 20 yeares and upwards, and others ten yeares and upwards
and all of them 3 yeares and upwards there living and saith that most
of the sayd persons are merchands and have not signes
hanging at their doores as is supposed in this Interrogatory

To the 7. he saith he hath knowne the sayd Overbockes, and [?Bernbecks]
Luces and Sprakalls and their respective familyes as also Martin
and Cors living in hamburgh for 20 yeares and upwards, and
the rest of whom he hath deposed 3 yeares and upwards and
beleiveth they have all lived there ten yeares and upwards
and saith he knoweth not that any of the sayd partyes have att any [?tyme]
dwelt in any port or place under the State generall of the United
Provinces or ffrench King, or that they or any of them are
or ever were subiects to them or any of them, or that they or
any of them the foresayd persons have had their howses or family
in any of the sayd United Provinces or in ffrance, nor hath ever
heard of any such matter and further cannot depose.

To the .8. he saith he hath receyved several letters from Hamburgh
from his owners aforesayd touching the sayd shipp and ladeing
and otherwise negatively

To the 9 negatively to very part thereof

To the 10. he saith he delivered some of the outward lading
videlicet some woolls and skinns to Andreas Anpsont and some
skinns and tinne to Jochim Collin. and some wooll
to one Dorville, and severall parcells more the Particulars
of which or of the foresayd parcells or of the names of the
rest of the persons having noe helpe att present to releive
his memory in this behalfe he cannot sett forth And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 11 he saith he hath bene severall tymes in ffrance
and att the port of Roane, and was last there before the
voyage in Summer was twelve moneth. and saith he knoweth
many of the laders of the sayd goods now in question. videlicet
he hath knowne Mark Peters a Bachelor factor living [?once]
while at Hamburgh. another while att Roane 3 yeares or thereabouts
John Van Campen a bachelor Hamburgher living as a factor
one while att Roane another while att Hamburgh. 6 yeares
or thereabouts. Jochim Colins a Bachelor. 5 yeares, living
in Roane. Nicholas [?Larcanine] a marryed man in Roane
ten yeares. Egbert Cappre a married man att Roane ten yeares
Alponte Soarez 2 yeares. Jacques Pallering a bachelor
att Roane about 6 yeares. Andreas Ampsant and John [?XXX]
bachelors att Roane 5 or 6 yeares. Beniamine [?Bamling]
5 yeares att Roane. Simon Vrouling att Roane 2 yeares [?Daniel]
Schochfenir att Roane 4 yeares. Henrick [?Amsant] 7 yeares att
Roane. Jochim Brugman a bachelor att Roane 6. yeares [?fXX]
Blanc a bachelor 6 yeares att Roane William Scott a married man
att Roane 5 yeares. Herman Wetgan att Roane 2 yeares and
att Hamburgh many yeares before. And further cannot depose.

[AT 90 DEGREES, LH MARGIN]

To the 12th interrogatory he saith the goods of the outward voyage were all laden att Hamburgh
and were all the ordinary merchandizes of the East Countreyes usually laden att Hamburgh
and other Easterling ports, and otherwise negatively
[XXXXX XXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Henry Favell[?xx] [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
Repeated before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.178r Annotate
Y.Y.

The 4.th day of November. 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Giles Risheuvel and Melchior Rediquer)
for their goods in the White Angell, John Lewison de)
[Vischer] master) Smith. Budd.)

Examined upon the said Allegation

[?Rp.]

2.us

3.us/ (sic)

Peter Vande Wyer of dunquirke in fflanders
Merchant aged 26. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined/:-

To the first second third and 4th articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That n the moneth of March last past, and before and to this present
the arlate Giles Risheuvel a Merchant of Antwerp was and is the
true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor of ten pipes and ten quartels of

'CR' [FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

oyle marked with the first marke in the margent, and the arlate Melchior
Rediquer at the time aforesaid and till this present was and is also the true and

'MR' [SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

onely Proprietor of ten pipes and 6. quartels of oyle of the second marke
in the Margent, and for and as such Owners they were and are commonly
reputed; which said respective parcells of oyles were in or about the
moneth predeposed laden and putt on board the said shipp the White
Angell at or neare Mallega by one Andries von Cantlebeck an Antwerper
and subiect of the King of Spaine ffactor and Correspondent to the said producents
for their respective Accompts, to be transported in the said shipp to dunquirke
and there to be respectively delivered to the said producents or their Assignes
for their use; Which hee knoweth for that this deponent
after the said shipp and her lading were surprized and taken and brought up into
England received letters of advise from the said producents. and also from the said
Andries van Cantlebecke his Correspondent, jointly concerning and expressing that
the said oyles were so laden for the accompt of the said producents respectively;
and whereas the said shipp and her principall Cargo did, (as in this Court hath been clearly [?proved, ALTERNATIVELY, predeposed]
belong unto one John Bollart a Merchant of Antwerp, between whom and
this deponent and the said Andries van Cantelbeck there hath bin mutual Correspon
dence in trade for severall yeares last past, this deponent in a letter of advise as
aforesaid from the said Cantelbeck received a particular accompt of all the goods laden aboard the said shipp
by him the said ffactor and for whose accompt and adventure hee had respectively
laden and putt the same aboard, and in particular that the oyles predeposed and now
Claymed were laden by him for the respective accompts predeposed; And otherwise
saving his following depositions hee saith hee cannot depose:/:-

To the 5th hee saith, That the said shipp with the oyles predeposed aboard her
in her Course from Cadiz towards dunquirke was mett withall surprized and
taken by some of the shipps of the Commonwealth shee having then two bbills of ading
aboard for and concerning the interest of the producents in the sayd oyles then aboard
her, which bills of lading are remaining in the Registry of this Court, as hee
beleeveth. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 6th hee saith, That for the reasons predeposed hee is fully assured that
the oyles predeposed were really and actually to have been delivered unto the
said producents each according to their respective proportions, for whoe
(accompts
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.178v Annotate
accompts the same were respectively bought and provided by the said [?Cantlebeck]
And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose/

To the 7th hee saith That the said producents were and are Merchants
of Antwerp, and Subjects of the king of Spaine, of this deponents certaine
knowledge, and are commonly accompted Natives of Antwerp
And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 8th and schedule annexed hee saith and deposeth, That by reason this
deponent by ten yeares experience is very well acquainted with the handwriting of
Andries van Cantlebeck, wherewith the said schedules or bills of lading
annexed are filled up, and is also very well acquainted with the usuall firme of
his precontest, wherewith the said bills of lading are firmed, hee is fully and
firmly assured of the trueth and reality of the contents of the said bills of
lading. And otherwise he cannot depose, saving that he beleeveth that the said
two bills of lading by the said ffactor were sent over land to the said producents
and by them to one Mr Vande Marsh their Correspondent here, as this
deponent by the said producents letters hath observed/:

To the 9th hee saith his foregoing deposition is true./:-

To the Crosse Interrogatories:/. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first negatively:

To the 2. hee saith hee hath knowne the said producents for about 8 or 9
yeares last past, and the interrate Andries van Cantelbecke in person and
Correspondencie for about 10 yeares last, And saith this deponent was not in
the Voyage in question, And therefore cannot further depose:-

To the 3. hee saith the said Andries van Cantelbeeck is ffactor to the
parties producent but not they to him, And otherwise cannot depose:/.

To the 4.th hee saith, that the said Risheuvel and Rediquer the parties producent
in this Cause are Antwerpers borne, by common report, where they
have lived with their respective families ever since this deponent knew [?them]
videlicet the said Giles Risheuvel neare the Towne hall of Antwerp, and
for the other hee remembreth not the name of the street, and the said
Andries van Cantelbeck hath lived at Mallega in Spaine for theise 5. [?yeares]
last, and formerly in Antwerp - And
otherwise cannot depose./

To the 5th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition And otherwise cannot
depose./:-

To the 6. negatively./

To the 7th negatively/:-

To the 8. 9. and 10th hee cannot depose:-/

To the 11th hee saith hee is in Conscience convinced that the oyles predeposed are
really and in trueth belong to the parties producent respectively, and were
directly bound for dunquirke, and no other port or place whatsoever

To the 12th hee knoweth nothing thereof otherwise then by the letter of [?the]
said producents predeposed, whereby they signified to this deponent that the said
ffactor had laded the sayd oyles for their accompts and by their [?XXXX]

To the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.179r Annotate
To the 13th hee saith hee well knoweth that the parties interrate have for severall
yeares held Correspondence together, and beleeveth The said ffactor at or before the lading
of the oyles predeposed had goods and effects in his hands belonging to the said producents
And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 14th hee referreth to his foregoing deposition.

To the 15 hee saith hee is a Native of Sevill in Spaine, And otherwise negatively

To the 16. hee saith, That the shipp the White Angell interrate began her outward
Voyage from dunquirke in ffebruary last, laden with pipestaves and flemmish
piece goods for the accompt of John Bollart Merchant of Antwerp and no other

To the 17. negatively saving the pipestaves aforesaid were bought with the said shipp
at Amsterdam, and brought on the same to dunquirke, and there to Spaine.

To the 18. negatively./

To the 19. hee cannot depose:/

Pedro Vandewÿer [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke
and Doctor Godolphin./
----
The 8.th day of November 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Martin Claeson Vandersippe and others)
for the shipp the Saint John of Ostend Pieter Roberts)
Master) and her lading of salt. Suckley. Smith)

Examined upon an Allegation on the behalfe
of the said Claymers

j:us

Peter Roberts of Ostend Mariner Master of the
said shipp the Saint John ageed 54. yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined saith as followeth
videlicet:

To the first and second articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That the
arlate Martin Claeson Ambrose de Messina and Anthony Clincart all
fflandrians since the moenth of Aprill last past have been and still are the
true and lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the shipp the Saint John arlate and of
her tackle apparrell and furniture, and for such commonly reputed and taken
And saith That in or about the moneth of July last past the said producents
being in the peaceable possession of the said vessell sett her forth from Dunquirke
laden with deale boards blacking pott ashes and other goods bound to this Port
of London consigned to certaine Merchants here, where shee arrived in safety,
and delivered the said lading according to the directions of the said Owners and after
delivery thereof the said Owners writt a letter to Mr Robert Gale a Merchant here
in London to send the said shipp to Crossick in ffrance there to be laden with salt
by one Rozee their ffactor for their accompt, Which hee knoweth being constituted
Master of the said shipp by the said producents at Dunquirke presently after they
had bought the same at Dunquirke, and having ever since continued Master of
and conducted her by their appointment and saw and perused the letter sent by the said
Owners to the said Mr Gale to the effect aforesaid. And otherwise saving his
following deposition hee cannot depose:-/:-

To the 3. and 4th hee saith, That according to the directions given by the said
letter this deponent with his said shipp sett saile from hence to Crossick in ffrance
and beeing there safely arrived this deponent went from thence to the said factor
at Nantes, requiring him to cause his said shipp to be laden with salt
(according
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.179v Annotate
according to the order aforesaid, where the said Rogee told this deponent that
hee had then received no order  from the said Owners to that effect, but about 4
daies after acquainted this deponent that hee had received letters to that purpose
which hee shewed this deponent and wished him accordingly to goe to Croisick
to receive his lading of salt, which about the middle of August last past
this deponent there recveived aboard, consisting in foure and twentie moyes
and a halfe for the accompt of, the said Owners and one moye and a half
for this deponents accompt to be transported in the said shipp to Dunquirke
aforesaid, and there to be delivered accordingly, and saith
the said shipp really belongeth to Ostend and not to any Port or place in Holland Zeeland
or any other part under the Dominions of the States Generall. The premisses hee
well knoweth being Master of the said shipp, and present at and acting in the
premisses, And otherwise saving his followeing depositions hee cannot depose:/

To the 5th and schedule annexed hee saithm That the said schedule or bills of
Ladeing annexed dated the 19th of August 1653. was and is one of her
originall bills of lading made for the receipt and delivery of the said
salt according to the Contents thereof, and signed with the proper hand
writing of this deponents personally , as hee saith, whereas it is expressed in
the sayd bill of lading, that the said salt was laden by the said Rozee, the
trueth is, the same was laden by Paul Maillard in the name and by the
order of the said Rozee who at the time of lading was at Nantes, and
not at Croisick aforesaid. Which hee knoweth for the reasons predeposed:-

To the 6th and schedule annexed hee saith, That the said schedule was and
is a Seabrief or passe Orderr the seale of Oastend, subscribed by Thomas
Daelman the Greffier or REgister of that place; and granted unto this deponent
by the Magistrates of that place for the safe passage of his sayd shipp, which
said schedule was found aboard the said shipp at the time of seizure, and thie
contents thereof are reall and true; Which hee knoweth being the person mentioned
therein, wo procured and obtained the same of the said magistrates for the
inetnet predeposed. And otherwise deposeth not./.

To the 7. and schedule annexed hee saith, That by reason that at the time
thsi deponent with his said shippe was ready to sett sayle from Croisick aforesaid
there then lying in the Roade of Croswick a french man of warr of 6 Gunnes
this deponent for the securing of his said vessell and lading signed theree
false bills of lading annexed pretending the said shipp to be of Middleborough
which he did for the intent predeposed, and not according to the Verity of
the matter, and saith That another paper annexed beginning 'Att the'
'Office of the Provost shipp of Nantes et cetera' and ending 'Guillore'., was also at
Croisick procured by this deponent for the securing of his said shipp and his
lading from ffrench men of warr as aforesaid, in regard of the warr
between ffrance and Spaine, and saith the said paper is onely feihmed and
coloured for the end aforesaid and not otherwise, as it is usuall and
Customary for fflandrian shipps trading with the Ports of ffrance to doe
And saith that another paper annexed beginning 'To all those who'
(shall
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.180r Annotate
shall see there our present Letters et cetera' and ending, 'Retributing unto their'
Subjects' and sealed with a Seale on greene waxe, was and is an ould colourable
passe, which this deponent usually carried to ffrance for the securitie of his
trading there, but saith that his then shipp the Sea Merve mentioned in the
said passe, (which shipp about 2 yeares since was taken by the Irish, as this deponent
hath heard) did then really and truely belong to one Julian Gowson and others of
Ostend, and not to any of Middleborough, but that the same was so pretended
for the better securing of the said shipp from the ffrench men of warr, and
that it is usaull and common for shipps of fflanders trading into the Ports of
ffrance so to doe. Which hee knoweth being a fflandrian, and haveing for
many yeares sailed from thence to ffrance and England, and being as Master
of the shipp now Claimed well acquainted with all and singular the
premisses And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 8th and schedules annexed hee saith and deposeth, That one of the
said papers is a letter and the other a Procuration or letter of Attorney
both dated the 12th of August 1653. which were delivered unto this deponent
at Croisick in ffrance by a ffrenchman whom this deponent never saw before,
to enquire of one John Mourain his sonne deceased, and about the said
deceaseds estate if this deponent could find any in fflanders iin which businesse hee
was to act or not to act according as himselfe pleased. And otherwise cannot
depose:-/

To the 9th hee saith That the arlate Paul Maillart hath no manner of
interest in the salt predeposed, Which hee knoweth for the reasons ppredeposed
And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose, saving this deponent
paid for his owne salt with his owne moneys, and heard the said Rozee say at
Nantes before the lading of the other salt, That hee was to be payd for
the same by order of the said Owners out of the Bancks of Paris and Nantes

To the 10th hee saith, That the said Vessell with her said lading of salt
being in her Course from Croisick to Dunquirke was surprized and taken
by Captaine Henry Greene and Company  with a private man of warr, who
by shortly after the seizure thereof plundered and pillaged the same and tooke
away one hawser and a small anchor worth foure pounds sterling, two pieces of
Ordnance with thei Carriages and other appurtenances worth twenty foure pounds
one hundred pounds of Gunpowder worth seaven pounds ten shillings, all the
Cookes furniture, worth three pounds, the shipp Carpenters furniture worth two
pounds one hogshead of aquavita worth ten pounds, all this deponents apparrell
linnen trunck and other things worth seaven pounds, the shipps Victuallls worth forty pounds
and three musketts with the bandeleers worth one pound ten shillings
in all to the valew of One hundred and three pounds sterling or thereabouts
according to the best of this deponents Judgement and estimation. Which hee
deposeth for that this deponent being brought aboard the said Captaine Greenes
man of war, saw severall of the goods predeposed, when they were by the said
seizors brought aboard the said man of warr, and since hath seene some of
(them
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.180v Annotate
then in the Custodie of the said Captaine, and seizors And other
wise cannot depose, saveing that this deponent was once examined at the
Ile of Wight concerninge his voyage before any of the said plunder
was made, but being afterwards brought prisoner againe into the said man
of warr, hee there and after some daies imprisonment comeing ashore
saw and observed the premisses./

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first hee saith hee first saw the said shipp the Saint John at Dunquirke
in the possession of the said producents, and saw her last at the Coast in
the Isle of Wight in the possession of the said seizors And otherwise
negatively and further saveing his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose./

To the second hee saith, the said shipp by her mould seemeth to be a
Norway built shipp. And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the third hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Martin Clawsson vander
sippe for about 15 yeares last past, dwelling at Dunquirke and Ostend
and the said Ambrose de Messina this 40 yeares or thereabouts constantly 
dwelling at Dunquirke, and the interrate Anthony Clinckart for
theise 17. yeares last continually dwelling also at Dunquirke, and saith the
said Martin Claesson is owner of the half part of the said shipp, the said
Ambrose de Messina of 1/4. and the said Anthony Clinckart of 1/4.
which hee knoweth by the meanes aforesaid, and by the declaration of the
said producents, And otherwise negatively/

To the 4th hee saith hee saw and perused the letter interrate in or about the
moneth of June last past, here in London, and had the same in possession
and saith the same was signed by martin Claeson vander Sippe and
Ambrose de Messina, and saith it was in dutch, And otherwise saving
his foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 5th hee saith the said shippe sailed in her ballast onely from London to
Croisicke and that there was a false or formall Charterpartie made between
this deponent and the said Mr Gale for the preservation of the said shipp
and her lading from being taken by any English man of warr, which
Charterpartie was made here at London about July last, which was aboard
the said vessell at the said time of seizure. And otherwise saving his foregoeing
deposition hee cannot depose:-/

To the 6th hee saith hee can write and read written hand, and saith he
can speake and understandeth ffrench dutch and Spanish, and a little English.

To the 7th hee referreth to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 8th hee saith the letters predeposed in this deponents declaration to thee said
article of the said allegation were by this deponent seene in the hande of the said
Charles Rozee at Nantes, where this deponent read the same, and found them
to be signed with the usuall subscritpions of Martin Claesson Vander
Sippe and Ambrose de Messina aforesaid whereby they required the same
Rozee to cause the said shipp to be laden with salt for their accompt, and
for the payment to Draw moneyes upon them. And further cannot depose

(To the 9th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.181r Annotate
To the 9th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition And otherwise negatively

To the 10th hee saith hee is a Native of Artoys, and hath lived for ten yeares
last past at Dunquirke and Ostend, and is a Subject to the King of Spaine
and had two french men and a boy three flandrians and a boy, and said
none of them were or are Subjects to the States interrate:/

To the 11 hee saith hee signed the bill of lading interrate and two others of the
same tenor in the Counting house of Paul Maillard according to the date
thereof onely in the presence of the said Maillard

To the 12th hee referreth to his foregoing deposition:-

To the 13th hee saith hee doeth not exactly remember at present upon what
daies the first or last of the sayd shipps lading was taken aboard her:-/

To the 14 hee saith that the papers interrate were by this deponent hid in a hole
in the Cabbin of the said shipp, which hole the said shipps Carpenter had
made and covered, and beleeveth the same had not been detected if the said
carpenter had not done it./

To the 15th hee saith, ee this deponent did denye that hee had any
other papers aboard then those for Dunquirke, and those that were concealed
were soe done about 2 daies as hee remembreth before this deponent delivered his
other papers to the said Captaine Greene

Rych  oberesay[SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges
in Court:-/
----
The same day: [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-/

2.us

Peter Le Maistre of Dunquirke in fflanders
mariner Boateswaine of the said shipp the Saint John
aged 51. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first and 2 article of the said Alleagtion hee saith and deposeth, That upon or
about the 17th day of June last hee this deponent was hired by Mr Ambrose de
Messina a Merchant of Dunquirke to be Boateswaine upon the said shipp
from Dunquirke to this Port of London, and that at the time of his hireing
the said Ambrose de Messina told this deponent that hee and the arlate
Anthony Clincart of Dunquirke, and Mr Martin Claeson vander Sippe of
Ostend were then the Owners and Proprietors of the said shipp her tackle apparrell and
furniture, and saith that for such Owners the parties predeposed for all the time
predeposed have bene and are commonly accompted, And saith that about the
moneth of July last past, the shipp laden with deale boards blacking
pott ashes ad other goods was by the said producent sett out from Dunquirke to
London, where shee shortly after arrived and delivered her ssaid lading, and
shortly after the delivery thereof sailed from hence to Croisick in ffrance to
take in her present lading of salt to be transported  to Dunquirke. The premisses
hee knoweth being boateswaine of and aboard the said shipp during the whole
Voyage predeposed, and it being expressely agreed upon between this deponent and
his precontest the Master to goe to Dunquirke from Croisick And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the third and 4th hee saith, That in or about the beginning of the
(moneth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.181v Annotate
moneth of August last past the said shipp the Saint John arrived safely
at Crosick aforesaid whence after their arrivall the Master thereof this
deponents precontest went to Nantes expressely (as hee then told this deponent) to
speake with one Mr Rozee a ffactor there, about the lading of the said shipp
with salt for the accompt of the said Owners and about 4. or 5. daies after the
said Master returned with order from the sayd Rozee to one Paul Maillard at
Croisick to putt the present lading of salt aboard the said shipp, which hee
accordingly did, videlicet foure and twenty moyes and a halfe for the accompt
of the said producents, and one moye and a hafle for the said Master
to be transported as aforesaid to Dunquirke in fflanders to which Port she
really and truely belongeth, and not to any Port or place in obedience to
the States generall of the United Netherlands, The premisses hee knoweth
being as aforesaid an inhabitant of Dunquirke, and boateswaine of and
aboard the said shipp during the whole Voyage in question, and being as
aforesaid exoressely hired by his precontest for a voyage to Dunquirke, and
having himselfe a hogshead of brandewine aboard the said shipp, which hee
intended to have sold at Dunquerke for the support of his wife and family
residing there, And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 5. 6. 7. and 8th and schedules therein respectively mentioned and
annexed hee saith, That hee well knoweth the usuall seale of the Port
of Ostend which is imprinted upon the schedule mentioned in the 6th article
of the said Allegation, and beleeveth the said schedule to be the Seabrief granted by the
Magistrates there unto this deponents precontest, who is there a Burgher
And saith That a little before their coming from Crooisick, there being then
a ffrenchman of warr of 6. gunns lyeing thereabouts, this deponents precontest
said to this deponent that he had procured some papers to secure his said ship
and lading from the said ffrench man of warr, and saith hee beleeveth it is usuall in such
Cases for fflandrian shipps to procure colourable letters, they being otherwise liable
to be taken and confiscate by the ffrench, with whom they are at enmity
And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 9th hee saith, That the Master of the said shipp at the lading of the said
salt at Crosick told this deponent that the same was so laden and received
aboard for and upon the accompt and adventure of the said producents saving
one moy and a halfe which was for himselfe. And otherwise referring himselfe
to his foregoing deposition. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 10th hee saith, That the said Vessell the Saint John being in her Course
from Croisick towards Dunquerke was mett withall surprized and taken
by Captaine Henry Greene and Companie, and was by them brought to the port of
Cowes in the Isle of Wight, which hee knoweth being taken in and aboard the
said shipp, and saith that this deponent being kept prisoner aboard the said Greenes
man of warr, saw one hawser a small anchor two peeces of ordnance
with a quantity of gunpowder, three musketts and bandeliers belonging to the
said hsipp the Saint John brought aboard the said man of warr, and hath since
credibly heard that the said shipp hath been plundered of a great quantity
of her lading her sailes and other things belonging to the Master and Company
thereof
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.182r Annotate
thereof; but the valewes thereof hee knoweth not, saying that this deponent
for his owne accompt had as aforesaid one hogshead of [?SXXXX] wine aboard the shipp aforesayd
worth tne pounds sterling or thereabouts which hee beleeveth is also plundered and
taken away by the said seizors. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the Interrogatories:/

To the first hee saith, That hee first saw the shipp the Saint John interrate at
dunquirke in the possession of the said Owners and last at the Isle of Wight
in the possession of the said Greene and Companie. And otherwise negatively
saving his foregoing deposition to which hee referreth/:-

To the 2. hee cannot depose/

To the 3. hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Martin Claesson vander
sippe dwelling at Ostend for theise 15 yeares last past or thereabouts
and hath knowne the interrate Ambrose de Messina for theise 25 yeares last
past dwelling at dunquirke, and the said Anthony Clincart for about 14
yeares living at dunquicke and Ostend, and never knew any of them residing in
any part of the dominions of the States interrate, And otherwise negatively
and further saving his foregoing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 4:th hee saith hee hath not so deposed./

To the 5:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 6. negatively, saving hee can speake ffrench, fflemish, and Spanish:-

To the 7:th hee referreth to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the 8:th hee hath not so deposed, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 9:th hee refrreth himself to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise negatively:-

To the 10:th hee saith hee this deponent is a Native of Rentry neare Saint Omers
in the land of Artoys, and hath for ten yeares last past dwelt t dunquirke and
Ostend, and is a Subject to the King of Spaine, and saith the Master this deponents [?pXXXX]
is an Ostender and the rest of the shipps Companie were fflemmings and ffrench.
And no Subject sof the States of the United Netherlands./.

To the 11:th hee hath not so deposed./

To the 12:th hee first saw the sea brief interrate at this present time of his examination
And otherwise negatively:-

To the 13. hee saith, hee cannot depose otherwise then hee hath predeposed./

To the 14. hee cannot depose/:

To the 15. negatively:- And otherwise cannot depose:-/

the marke of
Peter le [CROSSE] Maitre [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the Judges in Court./
----
The 10:th of November .1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

3.us/

Thunis Jacobson of dunquirke in fflanders Mariner
aged 24 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined:/

To the first and second articles of the said Allegation he saith and deposeth That
in or about the moneth of March last past, (as this deponent now remembreth the time)
this deponent being in the house of Anthony Clinckart Merchant at dunquirke
this deponents Uncle, the said Clinckart acquainted this deponent that hee the
said Clinckart and Ambrose de Messina of dunquirke, and Martin Claesson
(van
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.182v Annotate
Vander sippe of Ostend had bought the shipp the Saint John arlate then lying
at the Kay at dunquirke for their proper accompt, and that they were the
Proprietors and Owners of the said shipp her tackle and furniture, And for
such Owners the parties predeposed were and are commonly knowne and accompted
And this deponent about the moneth of May last past being at dunquirke
saw Peter Roberts this deponents precontest, and Master of the said shipp, busied
about the trimming and fitting of the said shipp to sea for the use of the said
Owners as the said Peter Roberts then and there expressely declared unto this
deponent And otherwise hee cannot depose:/

To the rest of the articles and papers annexed hee cannot depose otherwise then
as hee hath predeposed, forasmuch as hee was not in the Voyage in question
nor knoweth any thing of the passages thereof, nor of the contents of all or
any of the said papers annexed./

To the Crosse Interrogatories:-

To the first hee saith hee first and last saw the shipp the Saint John interrate
in the possession of the parties producent at dunquirke, And otherwise saving
his foregoeingd depositions hee cannot depose:-

To the 2. hee cannot depose:/

To the 3. hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Martin Claeson Vander sippe
for theise 6. or 7. yeares last past living at dunquirke, and saith hee now
liveth at Ostend, and the said Ambrose de Messina for theise ten yeares
liveing at dunquirke, and Anthony Clinckard this deponent hath knowne
ever since hee can remember living at dunquirke, and for some monethes at
Ostend, And knoweth not that ever since this deponent knew them, they or any of
them have lived out of the dominion of the King of Spaine. And otherwise
negatively. And further cannot depose:/

To the 4.th hee saith hee hath not so deposed./

To the 5:th negatively, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 6:th hee saith hee can write and reade written hand, and understandeth
fflemmish and french:/

To the 7.th hee knoweth nothing thereof./

Toi the 8:th hee saith hee hath not so deposed./

To the 9:th hee knoweth nothing thereof, having not so deposed./

To the 10:th hee saith hee this deponent is a dunquirker borne and liveth there
and hath so done from his infancy, and is a Subject of the King of Spaine.
and saith the Master of the said shipp the Saint John is a dunkirker. And othewise
cannot depose:-/

To the 11:th hee hath not so deposed/

To the 12:th negatively/.

To the 13:th hee cannot depose:-/

To the 14:th hee hath not so deposed./

To the 15:th hee knoweth nothing thereof:-/

Repeated before doctor Clarke
and doctor Godolphin:-/

[?XXXX] [?Jacobsson] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.183r Annotate
The 12:th day of November 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

4.us

Adrian Revelle of Dunquirke in fflanders
Mariner aged 23. yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1. and 2. articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That
in or about the moneth of March last past the shipp the Saint John arlate being
brought up to Dunquirke for prize and there openly sold at the kay to
the arlate Anthonie Clincart Merchant, and the arlate Martin Claesson
Burgher of Ostend, and Ambrose de Messina Burgher of Dunquirke
Which this deponent well knoweth, being personally present when the said
shipp was so sould after the publique and usuall manner of selling of
shipps in fflanders and seeing and hearing the said Anthony Clinckart
in publique accept of the price propounded by the then Owners of the said
shipp being Burgers of Dunquirke, and engageing for the payment of the summe
of moneys then agreed upon for the said shipp, And further saith, That
in or about the moneth of June last past, this deponent being at Dunquirke
saw the said shipp the Saint John fitted and furnished for a voyage to London
by the said Owners for whose accompt shee was bought, and saw some part
of the provisions brought aboard her from the house of the said Ambrose
de Messina a Brewer in Dunquirke, And saw some part of the lading
designed for London as aforesaid brought aboard the said shipp videlicet deale boards
pott ashes,a nd was desired by his precontest Peter Roberts then and nowe
Master of the said shipp to goe along with him in his intended Voyage for
England. Which this deponent then told the said Master hee could not doe in regard
hee was hired upon another voyage And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10th hee cannot depose:/

To the Interogatories./

To the first hee referreth to his foregoeing deposition.

To the second hee cannot depose:-/

To the third hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Martin Claeson, for
about 7. yeares last past living at Ostend and Dunquirke, and the interrate
Ambrose de Messina living at Dunquirke so long as this deponent can
remember and the said Anthony Clincart ever since this deponent hath knowne
him hath lived also at Dunquirke, and for some few weekes at Ostend, And
saith that none of the said persons have ever lived att [?XXX] in any place in
subjection to the States interrate/

To the 4:th hee saith hee hath not so deposed./

To the 5.th negatively, And further cannot depose/

To the 6. negatively, saving that hee onely speaketh the flemmish speech.

To the 7. hee cannot depose./

To the 8. and 9 hee hath not so deposed
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.183v Annotate
To the 10.th hee saith hee is a dunquirker borne and dwelleth there and is a [?subiect]
to the King of Spaine, and saith the said Peter Roberts Master of the
shipp is and hath for severall yeares, of this deponents knowledge beene a Burgher
of Ostend, and there inhabitant./.

To the 11.th hee hath not so deposed./

To the 12:th negatively:-

To the 13:th hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 14:th hee hath not so deposed./

To the 15:th hee cannot depose:/

the marke of
Adrian [MARKE] Revelle.

Repeated before the Judges in Court/
----
The 17:th day of November .1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Libertie of England et cetera against)
the shipp the Golden [?Mill], (John Hey Master)
and against the goods in the same. Budd)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe of the [?claymers]

jus./

John Hey of Hamborough Mariner Master of the
said shipp the Goulden Mill aged 38. yeares or
thereabouts sworne in Court and examined./

To the first hee saith hee this deponent was Master of and aboard the said shipp
the Goulden Mill at the time of her late seizure by a ffrigatt of the
Commonwealth, and had so been for a yeare last past, and hath lived at
and hath alwaies been a Subject to that State of Hamborough from his infancy, where hee now keepeth his family; and is [?XXX]

To the second hee saith, That the shipp the Golden Mill interrogated at the
time of her seizure was bound directly for Hamborough, and began her
outwards voyage from Hamburgh in the moneth of July last past
where shee was fraighted upon Charter partie by Jerome Snitcher and
Daniel Brandts Merchants and Burghers of Hamborough. And
otherwise cannot depose, saving his following depositions./:-

To the third hee saith, That the said shipp in her outwards Voyage was
laden with pipestaves and piece goods laden by the said ffraighters for their
owne accompt, and some part thereof for Everard Anckerman, Harman
Rensel, and other Merchants of Hamburgh whose names this deponent cannot
at present well remember, and were consigned to be delivered at Mallaga
to Simon Milfort, Gisbert van Susteren and Companie, John [?PXXX]
and Christopher Borsell all of them factors to the said Hamburgher
Merchants And saith the said shipp hath been at no other Port but [?Malaga]
since shee came last from Hamburgh, till the time shee was seized and
brought up to Plimmouth. And further cannot depose:/

(To the 4:th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.184r Annotate
To the 4:th hee saith the said shipp had layen at Hamburgh about 6. or 7
weekes to be trimmed and fitted to sea for the voyage in question, and was come
hither from Cadiz laden with wyne and oyle for the accompt of
Vincent Clinlenbergh, Cornelius de Hartegh and Christian Laurens the
principall Owners of her then Cargo, and for others, all Merchants and
Burghers of Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot depose:-/:-

To the 5.th hee saith hee this deponent is the present Master of the said shipp, and
was first made Master of her at Hamborough about a yeare agoe by the Owners thereof videlicet John
Scrothering Peter van Sprechels Peter Guldenhair, Arent van Haesdonck
and the widdow of John Hartmann[?sson] late Master of the said shipp all Hamburghers
and Natives of that place as this deponent beleeveth, And saith hee hath no
part nor interest in the said shipp. And otherwise cannot depose, saving that
the said Widdow in right of her said deceased husband had and hath a fourth
part in the said shipp her tackle apparrell and furniture:-/:-

To the 6:th hee saith the Owners of the shipp predeposed have dwelt at Hamburgh
for about 20. yeares last past of this deponents certaine knowledge, and saith
the said shipp is a Lubecker built, but this deponent saw not any moneys paid
for the same, And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose.

To the 7:th hee saith, That the present lading of his said shipp was all taken
in at Mallega, and that this deponent well knoweth all the persons interrate saving
Robert van Susteren, which hee beleeveth is mistaken for Gisbert van Susteren
predeposed, and saith hee this deponent was often in Compagnie with them at
Mallega, And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot depose.

To the 8:th hee saith, hee hath knowne Harman Rentzell Mr Peter van
Sprechel Adrian Yonker William de Labiestradt Everard Anquerman,
Godfrey and Joachim Scholt and Jerome Snitcher all Burghers and inhabitants
of Hamburgh ever since this deponent can remember, and Mr Augustine [?Brun]
George Kirkhoof Hans van [Jerusalem] and George Moller for three yeares
or thereabouts dwelling also at Hamburgh. and the interrate Joseph de Torres
this deponent knoweth not, and saith that all the persons predeposed to be knowne
by this deponent  sent goods in the said shipp to Mallega, (except the said Labestradt
Kirkhoof, van Jerusalem, and Moller) and have all of them goods on the said
shipp at present, but for the particular quantities or sorts of goods belonging to
the said persons respectively, this deponent referreth himselfe to the bills of lading
found aboard the said shipp at the time of her seizure, And otherwise cannot
depose, saving that this deponent had no bills of lading aboard for 15 pipes of
wine laden by this deponent for the accompt of the said Peter van Sprechel, and
60. fatts of raisins laden also by this deponent for the accompt of Adrian
Yonckher aforesaid./:-

To the 9:th hee saith hee had 14 men and boys aboard his said shipp being her whole
(Companie
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.184v Annotate
Companie, and all of them Hamburghers or Easterlings, and came first aboard
her at Hamburgh, And otherwise negatively.

To the tenth hee saith hee this deponent hath 9 pipes of wine, and his Stiersman
8 pipes of wine aboard and others of his Companie some other small parcells of
goods for which there were no bills of lading aboard, And otherwise saving
his foregoing depostions hee cannot depose:-/

[?Joan] [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 17:th day of November 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Libertie of England et cetera against the)
shipp the Saint Mary whereof Peter van Dunhem)
was Master- Budd)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe of the
State:-/

jus./

Peter van Dunhem of Hamborough
Master of the said shipp the Saint Mary aged
43. yeares or thereabouts sworne in Court and
examined:-/

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, hee thsi deponent was Master of and aboard
the shipp the Saint Mary interrate at the time of her late seizure and [?had]
soe beene for about 8. or 9. yeares last past, and is a Native of Hamborough
and a Subject of that free State, and hath kept his wife and family there
for above ten yeares last past, and to this present,/:-

To the second hee saith, The said shipp the Saint Mary at the time of her seizure
was bound Directly for Hamborough, from whence shee began her outwards
Voyage in the moneth of July 1652. last past to Archangell in
Muscovie, being taken to fraight at Hamborough by Arnold Belties and
Philip Verpoorten Burghers and Merchants of Hamborough, according
to Charter party made between the said Merchants and the Owners of the said
shipp, and was at Archangel aforesaid to take in a lading of [?Caveare]
and Russia leather to be transported from thence to Ligorne, for the [accompt
of the two Merchants aforesaid, where this deponent according to their order
delivered part of the said lading, and with the rest sailed to Venice [?and]
there delivered the same for the accompt aforesaid. And otherwise cannot [?depose]

To the third hee saith, the said shipp went onely in her ballast from
Hamborough to Archangell aforesaid, where shee tooke in her lading [?as]
aforesaid, and delivered the greatest part of the same at Ligorne to one Joseph Hermann [?an]
Merchant according to the order and direction of the Merchants predeposed [?and]
the rest of the said lading this deponent delivered to Seignor Spinetti and
brethren at Venice for the accompt and by order of the said Arnold [?Belties]
and Philip Verpoorten, and saith the said shipp since her departure from
Hamborough hath onely been at Archangell Cadiz Ligorne and Venice
([?such]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.185r Annotate
such time as shee was lately seized, and brought up to Plimouth. And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 4, hee saith, That the said shipp the Saint Mary had layen at Hamburgh
for about 6. or 7. moneths (as this deponent remembreth) before shee began
her outward Voyage from thence, and came from Lisbone thither laden with
salt and sugar for the accompt of severall Merchants of Hamburgh, to
whom this deponent delivered the same, but remembreth not at present their
particular names./:-

To the 5.th hee saith hee this deponent is the present master of the said shipp
and saith That about 9. yeares since this deponent bought the said shipp
at Hamborough for the accompt of himselfe and his ffellow Owners and
then became master of her, and saith that one Barent Cordes of Lubeck was
Master of her before this deponent And saith hee this deponent hath
in partnershipp with his brother in law ffrancis [?Meynke] of
Hamborough 3/8. parte of the said shipp her tackle apparrell and furniture
for which they paid to the said Barent Cordes one thousand three
hundred seaventie and four rixdallers for their said 3/8 parts, And otherwise
cannot depose:- saving the sayd Barent Cordes was not aboard at the seizure aforesaid./

To the 6:th hee saith that Henry Selm, Daniel Brandts, Wilkin
Wrede, Philip Collin[?s] Derrick Thooneman, Balthazar Pauland
ffrans van Bremen Gregorie Harman and this deponent and his said brother in Law
all Hamburghers are Owners of the said shipp and have dwelt there ever since this deponent can remember
and saith that the said Henry Selm is Owner of one 1/8 part, Daniel Brandts
of 1/8 Wilkin Wrede. Philip Collins Derrick Thooneman Balthazar
Paulland ffrans van Bremen and Gregorie Harman each of 1/16 part
and saith the said shipp being by this deponent bought as aforesaid and that
for the summe of eleaven thousand markes Lubecks money, the said
Owners paid this deponent their respective proportions for the same, and hee this
deponent immediately paid the same unto the said Barent Cordes in the
banck at Hamborough, besides 9000 markes Lubecks money which were
paid proportionably by the Owners aforementioned for the equipping and
setting forth of the said shipp to sea. And otherwise saving his foregoing
deposition to the 5:th Interrogatory hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 7.th hee saith, that the whole preset lading of the said shipp was
taken in at Venice and Ligorne, and saith hee well knoweth the interrate
ffrancis van Axell and the heires of Adolph van Axell John [?ff?ine]
and Corneluis van Neck, and saith hee this deponent was severall times in
Company with them at Venice and Ligorne where they came divers times
aboard this deponents shipp. And otherwise negatively, and further cannot depose

To the 8:th hee saith this deponent hath dwelt at Hamborough from
his infancie to this present, and saith hee well knoweth the interrate John
(Scrothering
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.185v Annotate
Scrothering is one of the Magistrates of Hamburgh, and Egidio
Rolland and Mr Eerhart all Burghers and inhabitants of Hamburgh
for so long as this deponent can remember, And saith That the greatest part
of the present lading of the sayd shipp belongeth to the said John Scothering
and the rest to the said Mr Rolland and Mr Eerhart and others
Merchants of Hamburgh, And otherwise saving his foregoing and following
depositions hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the 9th hee saith, That hee this deponent had 25. men and boyes abord
him being all Hamburghers or Easterlings and none of them Subjects of
the States of the United Netherlands, and saith hee tooke them all or most aboard
at Hamburgh, And otherwise negatively:-/

To the 10:th hee saith hee this deponent hath some muskadine wine, [?XXX]
and rice and two Cases of Venice glasses, and some small goods in his
Chest for his owne accompt for which there were no bills of lading
aboard, And otherwise referring himselfe to the bill of lading from
aboard his said shipp at the time of her seizure, and his booke of
entries for the sayd goods, hee cannot at present further remember
or particularly depose:

Peter Vandunnen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 18th day of November 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

Philips and Companie against the shipp the Redd Lyon)
(whereof Michael Jochinson is Master) and against Dorvile)
et cetera Smith. ffrancklyn)

Examined upon an Allegation given [?in]
on the behalfe of the sayd [?Dorvile]
and others./

j.us/

Henry Van Nelsen of Hamborough [?Mariner]
aged 63. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes
sworne and examined saith and deposeth
as followeth videlicet:/

To the first second third and 4.th articles of the said Allegation hee saith and
deposeth, That hee this deponent hath well knowne the arlate Michael
Joachinson a Burgher and inhabitant of Hamborough and a Subject of
that free state for theise 7. yeares last past or thereabouts, And saith
that the said Michael Joachinson for about two yeares last past had
bin and at present is the true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor of the
shipp or Vessell the redd Lyon arlate and of her tackle apparrell and
furniture, and for such was and is well knowne at Hamborough, to which
Port the said shipp really and truely belongeth, Which hee knoweth
being a Burgher, and inhabitant of Hamborough, and having knowne the
said Michael Joachinson for the time aforesaid in the quiet and [?peaceable]
([?possession]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.186r Annotate
possession of the said shipp, and as Master and Proprietor of her fitt
and sett her out, and conduct her to Sea, And saith That
by common report at Hamburgh aforesaid this deponent hath Credibly heard
and understood that the said Master had bought the said shipp at
Tunning in the Dukedome of Holsteyn of one Carsten Pau[?ll], whom
this deponent for about 4. yeares before the sale of the said shipp, knew to
be Master of the same. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. and 15 articles and schedules annexed hee
saith hee knoweth nothing thereof, And saving his foregoing depositions
hee cannot further or otherwise depose./

[?XXXXXXXXXXXXX]

Hinrick van [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation./

dt.

2.us/

William Oldison of Hamborough Mariner
aged 42. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4:th articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That hee this deponent hath well knowen the arlate Michael Joachinson
a Burgher and inhabitant of Hamborough and a Subject of that State
for about 7. yeares last past; And saith that about two yeares since
it being published at the Exchange of Hamborough, That the shipp the
redd Lyon arlate then lay at or near Tuning in the Dukedom of
Holsteyn, to be sold, the said Michael Jochinson went to Tuning
expressely to buy the same and shortly after conducted and brought her
from thence to Hamborough, where this deponent saw him in the quiet
and peaceable possession of her, and as Master and Proprietor of her
the said producent hath since made severall voyages with the said shipp
from the said Port of Hamborough to which place in reality and
trueth shee hath belonged ever since shee was bought at Tunning
and brought from thence by the said Master, And so much hee
saith is publique and notorious amongst Shipowners and Burghers
of Hamborough aforesaid. Which hee deposeth being himselfe a
Hamburgher and a Master of a shipp belonging to the said Port and
by reason of his familiarity with the said Master well acquainted with
all and singular the premiises, And otherwise cannot depose, saving
That about the beginning of October last past the said shipp as
fitted to sea by the said Master at the proper charges of this deponents
certaine knowledge, hee being present and severall times in Companie
with the said Master at Hamborough during the time of the said shipps
equipping for the voyage now in question:/:
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.186v Annotate
To the 5. and 6.th and Charterpartie therein mentioned hee saith and
deposeth That about 8. weekes since (the time hee otherwise remembreth
not) hee this deponent was personally present at the Burse or Exchange
at Hamburgh, when the arlate John Dorville a Merchant and
Burgher there spoke unto and agreed with the said Master for
takeing of the said shipp to freight upon a Voyage to Roane in
ffrance, but saith hee saw not the makeing or signing of any Charter
partie concerning the said Voyage, And further cannot depose

To the 7:th hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 8:th hee saith hee this deponent in or about the time predeposed saw [?XXX]
quarteeles of Traine oyle, putt on board the said
shipp the redd Lion then lying and being in the Haven of Hamb[?orough]
for the accompt and by the order of the said John Dorville, and saw the
said Dorville
his servants at the lading of the said goods [?from]
whom and others this deponent heard and observed the premisses. And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 10.th hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 11. hee saith, That hee this deponent hath personally knowne the arlate
John Dorville for a yeare and a halfe last past or thereabouts, and
saith the said Dorville for the said time of this deponents certaine knowledge
and for manie yeares before by common report hath lived at Ham
borough, and was and is a Merchant there and a Subject of this [?free]
State , and for such was and is commonly accompted. And otherwise
hee cannot depose:/

To the 12:th hee saith, That the arlate Joos van Overbeek (who departed
this life about a yeare agoe) was in his life time a Merchant and
Citizen of Hamburgh, and that his widdow and heires are also Burghers
there and Subject of that free State. And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the 13:th hee saith, That this deponent well knoweth the arlate [?XX]
Dorvile, who is brother to the said John Dorville, and resideth at [?Rouen]
in ffrance as a ffactor for Hamborough Merchants, And otherwise
cannot depose, saving that the ffather of the said Dorville is a Burgher
and inhabitant at Hamburgh, and beleeveth his said sonne is a [?Burgher]
of that place./

To the 14. and 15.th hee knoweth nothing thereof/

To the last hee saith his foregoing deposition is true:-/

(To the Crosse
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.187r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories/

To the first negatively.

To the second hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing depositions. And otherwise
cannot depose, saving that the interrate Michael Jochinson is a Batchelor
and hath constantly had his dwelling place at Hamburgh for 7 yeares last/

To the third hee saith hee hath knowne the shipp the redd Lyon interrate for
about 5. yeares last past, and saw her last at Hamburgh, And otherwise
negatively.

To the 4th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And otherwise
negatively And further cannot depose:-/

To the 5. hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Widdow and heires of
Joos Van Overbeecke for theise 10. yeares last past, for which time they
have constantly lived in Hamburgh, and saith that Peter Van Overbeeke
and Joos Van Overbeeke are two of the heires of the said Joos Van
Overbeeke, and that there are two brothers, and two sisters more of the said
deceaseds children, whose names this deponent now remembreth not And otherwise
cannot depose, not knowing whether there be any more of the said heires/

To the 7th hee saith hee knoweth not neither doeth hee in Conscience beleeve
that any of the heires interrate doe inhabit in any of the places interrate

To the 8th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition. And otherwise
cannot depose:-/

Willim Olaffson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The aforesaid 'Henry van Nessen' to the Interrogatories/:

To the first negatively.

To the second hee saith the interrate Michael Jochinson iis a Bachelor and
hath lived at Hamburgh ever since this deponent hath knowne him:

To the third hee saith hee hath knowne the shipp the redd Lyon interrate for
about 6 yeares last past, and saw her last at Hamburgh about the
moneths of Aprill or May last past and hath not seene her since her 
takeing./:

To the 4th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And otherwise negatively

To the 5. hee saith hee knoweth not the interrate John Dorvill, but
hath often seen the widdow of Joos van Overbeeck interrate at Hamburgh
where shee liveth. And otherwise negatively:/

To the 6. hee knoweth nothing thereof:-/

To the 7th hee knoweth nothing thereof, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 8th hee saw not the lading of the goods interrate, And therefore
cannot depose./

Hinrick van [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated upon the interogatories and allegation/
before Clarke and the other Judges/
in Court:-/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.187v Annotate
The24 of Novermber .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Alleagtion

3.us/

John Boomgaerden of Thooren in [?Prussia]
Merchant aged 21. yeares or thereabouts a
Wittnesse sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet:-

To the 11:th article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That
this deponent about two moneths agoe being arrived at Hamborough
was there lodged in the house of one Mr Daniel Dorville a Merchant
of Hamborough, and Cozen to the arlate John Dorville, and that this deponent by [?such]
meanes came acquainted with the said John Dorvile and his ffather
who is a very aged and decrepit person, and saith That according to
Common report there the said Dorvilles for many yeares last past
have bin and still are Burghers and Merchants of great quality and
esteeme in that City, and Subjects of that free State, And further
this deponent saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the rest hee is not examined by Direction./

To the Interrogatories:- [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first negatively:-

To the 2. 3. and 4. hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 5: and 6: hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof, Otherwise than
hee hath predeposed to which hee referreth himselfe:-

To the 7:th hee knoweth nothing thereof

To the 8:th negatively, And otherwise cannot depose:-/

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin:-/

Johan Baumgarten  [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

4:us

Michael Jochimson of Hamburgh [?Mariner]
Master of the said shipp the Redd Lyon aged
29. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet

To the 1. 2. and 3. articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That about two yeares since hee this deponent at Tunning in the
Dukedome of Holsteyn bought the said shipp the redd Lyon together with her
tackle apparrell and furniture for his owne accompt of the widdow of one [?CXXXXX XXXX]
of Tunning (who formerly had been Master thereof) for the summe
(of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.188r Annotate
of one Thousand Ryx dollers the first penny, which this deponent paid unto
the said widow. and from that time to this present hath bin and is the
true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor thereof and of the tackle and
furniture thereunto belonging, And saith That after this deponent had
so bought and fitted and furnished the said shipp to Sea at his owne expenses
he did in person Conduct the same to the Port of Hamborough for his
owne accompt, since which shee hath alwaies belonged to the Port of
Hamborough, and as a shipp or vessell belonging to that Port shee
was and is well knowne, and saith That since that time, this deponent hath
made severall voyages with his said shipp, and constantly fitted her
out at his owne Costs and Charges. And so much hee saith is publique
and notorious amongest shipmasters belonging to that Port And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To The 4th hee saith That the said shipp the redd Lyon before her late
seizure by the arlate Captaine Hohman and Companie, came last from
the Port of Hamborough aforesaid about the beginning of October
last, from whence shee as sett out at this deponents proper Charges
and under his Conduct. And otherwise saving his following depositions
hee cannot depose:/

To the 5: and 6th articles of the said Allegation and Charterpartie therein
mentioned and now showne to this examinate hee saith and deposeth
That in the moneth of September last past the arlate John Dorville
a Burgher and Merchant of Hamborough tooke to fraight this deponents
said shipp the Redd Lyon at Hamburgh to proceed from thence to
Roane in ffrance with a lading of goods there to be discharged for the
accompt of the said John Dorville and the widdow and heires of Joos
van Overbeeck late of Hamborough deceased, and there to take in a
Cargo or ladeing of goods to be brought in the said shipp to Hamburgh, and
there delivered for the same accompt, And saith that upon or about the
seaven and twentieth day of September last past there was a Charterpartie
of affraightment made at Hamborough by a Notarie publique and wittnesses
thereunto required betweene the said John Dorville and this deponent for the
voyage aforesai, of which Charterpartie the schedule or Charterpartie of
affreightment allegate and now showne to this examinate was and is a
true Counterpart or exemplar, and saith that the said schedule was on
board the said shipp the Redd Lyon at the time shee was taken and
surprized by Captaine Holman and Companie, and together with the
rest of the papers belonging to the said shipp, videlicet an Atestation in paper under
the seale of the City of Hamborough and a Seabrief or passe under
(the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.188v Annotate
the said seale in parchement, and an Originall bill of lading for the goods
of the Owner aforesaid, and other papers belonging to the said shipp did fall
to the hands and possession of the said Captaine Holman and Companie to
whom they were brought or sent into, and are now remaineing in the
Registry of this Court, where they now remaine. And further saith That the
said Charterpartie so seized and now showne to this deponent was and is a true
Counterpart of the originall Notariall Charterpartie so made at Hamborough
as aforesaid, and was and is reall and true and so had and sone as therein is
contained, Which hee well knoweth being as aforesaid Master of the
said shipp the redd Lyon, and thereby present at and punctually acquainted
with the premisses. And otherwise cannot depose:-

To the 7th hee saith, That the said shipp the Redd Lyon being in her
direct Course from Hamborough for Roane, and  before her seizure by
the said Captaine Holman and Companie did meet with a Sea Rover
or ffrench man of warr (as hee pretended) who plundered and tooke away
from this deponents said shipp some cheeses part of the said shipps ladeing
and the Hamburgher Colors which this deponent then had on board his
said shipp, and afterwards dismissed the said shipp. Which hee well
knoweth by sadd experience, being as aforesaid then Master of and aboard
his said shipp: And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the 8th hee saith and deposeth, That in the moenth of October
last past, the said John Dorville in the name and for the accompt
of himselfe and the widdow and heires of Joos Van Overbeeck
aforesaid caused to be laden aboard this deponents said shipp then llying
within the booms or barrs at Hamborough, One hundred sixtie
and nine Quarteels of Traine oyle, which were brought on board this deponents
said shipp in Lighters from before the house of the said John
Dorville his father in Hamborough of this deponents sight and certaine
knowledge, And otherwise saving his precedent and following depositions hee cannot depose
saving that in the said moneth this deponent for the accompt of him
and Laurence Peterson his Stiersman laded aboard his said shipp
trhee hundred and twelve Cheeses/:-

To the 9th hee saith hee this deponent is a native of Lubeck in
Germania, and hath lived in Hamborough for ten yeares last past
or thereabouts, and is a Burgher there and a Subject of the ffree State
And otherwise cannot depose/:

To the 10th and schedule or bill of lading therein mentioned and showne
to this examinate at the time of his examination hee saith and deposeth
That the said bill of lading was and is one of the three Originalls
(bills
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.189r Annotate
bill of lading signed and firmed by thsi deponent at Hamborough presently
after the lading of the said One hundred sixtie nine Quarteels of Traine
oile, And saith that the said bill of lading weith other papers and writings
as aforesaid were aboard the said shipp at the time of her late seizure by
the said Captaine Holman and Companie, to whose hands they came
And saith that the said bill of lading was and is a true and reall
bill of lading, and that the contents thereof are reall and true and so
had and done as therein is contained. Which hee deposeth upon certaine
knowledge grounded upon the reasons predeposed. And otherwise cannot
depose:-

To the 11th hee saith, That the arlate John Dorville mentioned in the said
Charterpartie of affraightment and bill of lading was and is according to
the publique report and estimation at Hamborough a Native of that
place, and hath lived there ever since this deponent knew Hamburgh, of
which hee the said Dorvile was and is a Citizen and Subject, and for such commonly accompted
Which hee knoweth upon certaine knowledge grounded upon the reasons aforesaid.

To the 12th hee saith, That the arlate Joos van Overbeeck deceased was
whilest hee lived a Merchant of Hamburgh and a Citizen and Subject
of that free State, and for such commonly accompted, and that the said
deceased left behind him a Widdow and heirs which are all of them
Citizens and Subjects of Hamburgh aforesaid, Which hee knoweth being
also a Burgher and inhabitant of that Citie from which hee hath sailed
for theise ten yeares last and upwards./.

To the 13th hee saith hee doeth not personally knowe the arlate William
Dorvile and Wymant Hemomees mentioned in the bill of lading predeposed
but saith that by the relation of the said John Dorville and his mother
the said William Dorville is brother to the said John Dorville and
a Native of Hamburgh and a Subject of that free State,
and that hee and the said Hemomees by common repute have for severall yeeres
lived at Roane in the quality of ffactors for Hamborough Merchants
in which quality this deponent was to have delivered to them the Traine oyle aforesaud
to be disposed of to the best advantage of the Owners aforesaid, and to have
received from them a lading of goods to be transported to the said Owners in returne
of the said oyles. Which hee knoweth for the reasons predeposed. And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 14th and 15th and schedule annexed hee saith and deposeth, That at
the time of the seizure of his said shipp and her lading by Captaine
Holman and his Companie as aforesaid, there was on board
(belonging
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.189v Annotate
belonging to his said shipp all and singular the goods schedulate videlicet one
Harser 77. fathoms long worth 2 li 12 s One foresaile worth 2 li
sixteen shillings, One peece of Cordage above three Inches thicke and
ten fathoms long worth 7 s One standard or flagg with the holsteyn
Colors worth 9 s One boate belonging to the said shipp worth 2 li 10 s
Seaven Rixdollers in money of the valew of 1 li 10 ss 6 d and one sea [?booke]
worth 15 s sterling amounting in all to the summe of 12 li 5 s sterling
English money or thereabouts, all which goods the said Captaine and
some of his Companie have since the time of the siezure of his said
shipp plundered and pillaged away from the same, and converted the
to their Owne use, Which this deponent knoweth having the said 7 rix dollers
taken out of this deponents pockett att Sea by the Master of the said Captaine
Hohman his man of warr, and for the rest hee hath since the seizure
been advertised by his shippes Companie of the plundering thereof by
the said Holman or Companie=, and this deponent haveing since been aboard
his said shipp at Dover perceived that the severall things predeposed were
taken away and not remaining by or in the said shipp, as they had bin
immediately before the said seizure. And further hee cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first hee saith, hee had ten shipps pounds of the twelve
shipps pounds of cheese aoremenconed laden aboard his said shipp
the other two shipps pounds belonging to his said Steeresman And
otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition hee saith hee cannot depose [?but]
hee expecteth by the restitution his shipp and goods aforesaid, together
with the benefitt of his fraight and Voyage:/-

To the second hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And
otherwise negatively:-

To the third hee saith, That hee hath knowne the shipp the redd Lyon
interrate for about 5. yeares last past, and saw her last at Dover
where shee now remaines./
To the 4:th hee saith hee had a bill of sale for his said shipp from the widow aforesaid [?which ?hee]
hath left at Hamborough; And otherwise negatively saving his
foregoeing deposition to which hee referreth

To the 5th hee saith hee hath personally knowne the interrate [?XXX]
Dorville for 6. yeares and upwards, and formerly onely by relation
and saith hee knwoet not personally the widdow or heires of the said Joos
Van Over beeck otherwise then by the relation of the said John [?Dorville]
and by the common report in the City of Hamborough where
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.190r Annotate
live. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 6.th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 7.th hee knoweth nothing thereof otherwise then hee hath formerly
declared

To the 8:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition. And otherwise cannot
depose./:-

[?Micsall ?JoXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and
doctor Godolphin:-/
----
The 28:th day of November 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

Clayme of the widow and heires of Hans)
Lemmerman for their goods in the black Cock)

Examined upon the said Allegation:-/

[?XXX R: R:-]

2:-us

John Stootenpape Native of Neer in the
Principalitie of Liege or Luyck Merchant aged
33. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as afolloweth videlicet

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and
deposeth, That in or about the moneth of January 1652 (new style)
and for some moneths before and since this deponent then residing at Saint
Lucar in Spaine and familiarly acquainted and daily Conversing with the
allate John Scrother, hee this deponent heard him severall times say and declare
That according to letters of advise which hee had received over land from
Hamburgh from the allate Widow and heires of Hance Lemmerman
deceased, hee did expect the arrivall of the shipp the black Cock allate
(whereof John ffransen Haen was Master) laden with Pipestaves and
Clapboards for the accompt of the said Widdow and heires, and by them consigned
to the said John Scrother their ffactor or Agent to be by him sold or disposed
of to their best advantage. And saith. That accordingly in or about the
moneths of August or September in the yeare 1652. last past this deponent
being at Saint Lucars aforesaid, saw the arrivall of the said shipp the
black Cock at the said place with a lading of pipestaves and Clapboard as
aforesaid, which were there of this deponents sight and knowledge unladen and
received by the said John Scrother, and brought into his house and woodyard
for the accompt of the said widdow and heires, as the said John Scrother then
also severall times affirmed to this deponent And further to theise articles
hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 4.th article hee saith and deposeth, That in or about the moneth of
October 1652. last past, this deponent being then also at Saint Lucars aforesaid
and daily in Companie with the said John Scrother ffactor to the producent
([?in]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.190v Annotate
producents in this Cause, the said ffactor by and according to the order and
directions of the said producents (as hee then declared and affirmedto this
deponent) did of this deponents sight and knowledge by himselfe and servants[?s]
Cause to be laden and putt on board the said shipp the black Cock there
at or neare Saint Lucar aforesaid One hundred and fiftie butts of sack, [?and]
nine hundred and ninetie dozen of Corke, the said butts of ack being
marked some with the first, some with the second and some with the
third marke or Character in the margent to be transported and [?XXX]
in the said shipp from Saint Lucar aforesaid to Amsterdam, and there to be
delivered unto the arlate Bernardo Ras and Companie ffactors and [?Agents]
to and for the said producents, and for their proper accompt, as the said [?XXXX]
at the time of the said lading expressed and signified unto this deponent
by reason whereof this deponent is fully assured in Conscience that the said
producents were aare and ought to be the true and lawfull Owners and
Proprietors of all and singular the foods predeposed, and for such were
and are commonly accompted reputed and taken. And further hee [?saith]
That after the lading of the goods predeposed aboard, this
deponent being in order to his intended voyage for Ostend resolved to goe to
Cadiz, and before his departure being in discourse with the said John Scrother
at Saint Lucars hee told and acquainted this deponent that there were severall
quantities of goods more in his hands, which hee intended to imbarque in and
send away by the said shipp to Amsterdam for the accompt and [?risgoe]
of the said producents, but this deponents occasions not permitting him to [?see]
the lading thereof hee cannot depose to the quantitie number or qualitie

To the 5:th article hee saith and deposeth, That the wines and corke [?being]
in this deponents sight, as aforesaid, and a quantitie more of the lading now [?XXX]
by the producents, were, as hee beleeveth, bought and provided by the [?said]
John Scrother for the accompt aforesaid by and with the money goods and
effects of the said producents remaining in the said ffactors hands, at the [?tyme]
of buying of the said goods, and particularly saith That of this
deponents certaine knowledge the said John Scrother in presence of [?XXX]
in or about the moneths of Aprill and May in the yeare 1652
past, received from Henrick Scrother and Heyn Skoeback [??Shippers ?of]
Hamborough Copper wire, knives, linnen and other goods wares and
merchandizes of great valew sent unto him by the said producents from
Hamborough, besides the lading of pipestaves and Clapboards [?received ?by]
him as is predeposed with order and direction to dispose of the same for
their accompt and to make them retournes for the same, this deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.191r Annotate
then at Saint Lucar seene and perused the letters of advise sent by the shipp
the producents to their said factor to the effect aforesaid. And saith That the goods
videlicet the wines and Corke predeposed of this deponents certaine knowledge, and the
rest of the goods and Merchandizes claymed by the said producents, as hee beleeveth
were and are the proceed of such goods as hee hath predeposed received by the
said ffactor to and for the use and intent aforesaid. And otherwise saving his
foregoing and ffollowing depositions hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 6.th and 7.th and bills of lading or schedule therein mentioned but not
annexed hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 8:th hee saith, That it is notorious, That the said shipp the black
Cock under the Conduct of the said John ffransen Haen with the said wines
and Corke and the rest of her cargo aboard her being bound for Amsterdam
were mett withall surprized and taken by some shipp or shipps of this
Commonwealth, and brought into England. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9:th hee saith, That hee this deponent hath well knowne the arlate
John Scrother for theise 6. or 7. yeares last past residing at Saint Lucar
in Spaine as ffactor and Agent to and for the said producents and other
Merchants of Hambourgh, and saith hee hath also knowne the arlate
Bernardo Ras for about 3. or 4 yeares last past, and saith that for all
that time hee hath resided at Amsterdam as ffactor to and for the said
producents, and saith That for all the time respectively predeposed, they the
said Scrother and Ras have held and doe hold constant Correspondenceie
and Communication with the said producents as being in quality of ffactors
and agents to and for them as aforesaid, Which hee knoweth being familiarly
acquainted with the said ffactos and their negotiation. And otherwise
cannot depose:-

To the 10:th hee saith, That the arlate Hans Lemmerman deceased was
commonly and generally accompted a Native of Hamburgh or thereabouts
and whilest hee lived a Subject and Burgher of that Citie, and a Merchant
Driving a great trade into Spaine, and saith that for about 6. or 7. yeares
last of this deponents certaine knowledge, and since the decease of the said
Hance Lemmerman the said trade hath been continued by the
said widdow and John Lemmerman one of the sonnes of the said
deceased in the behalfe of themselves and of Thomas Lemmerman and
Hans Lemmerman arlate sonnes and coheires of the said deceased, who
hee saith are well knowne and generally esteemed at Hamburgh and elsewhere
the naturall and lawfull children of the said deceased and his said surviving
widow; which hee deposeth, being well acquainted with the said widdow and
heires, and having been in their house in the [?Grim] at Hamburgh, And
(otherwise
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.191v Annotate
otherwise knoweth thr premisses by the Credible relation both of the said [?John]
Scrother and many other persons of good esteeme with whom this deponent
hath conversed. And otherwise cannot depose,s aving his foregoing deposition]to which hee referreth:-

To the 11th hee saith, That the said Widow of Hance Lemmerman
deceased, and the said John Lemmerman Thomas Lemmerman and
Hance Lemmerman were and are all of them commonly and generally
accompted Natives of Hamborough where by common report they have
lived all or most of their lives, and are Inhabitants and Subjects of the [?said]
free State. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 12:th hee saith his foregoing deposition is true:-/

To the Crosse Interrogatories:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first negatively:-

To the second hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And otherwise
cannot depose, saving hee beleeveth that all the persons interrate have
lived in the street called the Grim aforesaid for all the time interrate

To the third hee saith, That the interrate John Scrother is a batchelor
and a Hamburgher borne, And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition
negatively, And further cannot depose:

To the 4:th hee saith hee this deponent was in Companie with the said John
Scrother at Saint Lucars when the said John Scrother bought severall
butts of sack of John da Medina, Don ffrancisco [?XXX]
Dorado, and the widdow of Seignor de Bracamonte, from whose
Cellars the wynes by him predeposed were brought and laden aboard the
said shipp, and saith this deponent saw the said John Scrother pay severall
considerable summes of money to the said Merchants respectively, for such
wynes as hee bought of them for the accompt predeposed but remembreth not the particular summes
so payd by him as aforesaid, And otherwise saving his fforegoing deposition to
which hee referreth himselfe hee saith hee cannot depose;

To the 5th: hee saith the interrate Jhn Scrother was in Company with the said
John ffransen Haen and this deponent at Saint Lucar both on shopare and [?aboard]
the said shipp the black Cock whilest shee lay last at Saint Lucar, and saith hee
well knoweth the said John Scrother is ffactor to the said producent, but [?not]
they to him and that the said goods were brought aboard the said shipp [?in]
barques by the direction of the said Scrother of this deponents sight and knowledge

To the 6:th hee saith hee hath not so deposed:-

To the 7.th 8: and 9th. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition. And otherwise
cannot depose:-

To the 10. hee saith, and declareth by Vertue of his oath, That for the [?XXX]
predeposed hee is fully Convinced in Conscience that the butts of [?wynes]
([?theXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.192r Annotate
the Cooke by him predeposed were really and truely laden aboard the said shipp
the black Cock as aforesaid for the accompt of the Widdow and heires predeposed
and for no other person whatsoever, and verily veleeveth that the rest of the goods now
Claymed doe alsoe truely appertaine to the said producents, And that no ffrench or
Dutch Subject or Subjects of the King or States interrate had or have any interest
therein./

To the 11:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, to which hee addeth, That
this deponent by letters of advise sent by the said producents to their said factor and
perused by this deponent well observed and knoweth, That the said producents gave him
order to lade wyne and fruit and other merchandizes in returne of the goods they
had sent him as aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 12th hee saith hee this deponent is a Native of Neere in the Principality of
Liege, and hath lived at Saint Lucar aforesaid for the most part of twelve yeares
last past. And otherwise negatively/:-

To the 13. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition:-

To the 14. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, and saith the said shipp
the black Cock by relation of the said Skipper John ffransen Haen and the said John
Scrother came from Dantsick to Saint Lucar with her lading and for the accompt
predeposed. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 15: and 16. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition:

To the 17. hee noweth nothiong thereof./

To the 18. hee referreth to his foregoing deposition:-

To the 19: hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 20: hee knoweth the interrate Berando Ras is a High German, And otherwise
saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose:-/

To the 21. hee saith hee well knoweth the interrate Joachim Verpoorten who is
also a High German and resideth as a ffactor or Merchant stranger at
Amsterdam, and doeth ffactory for the said John Scrother but not hee for the said
Verpoorten./

To the 22 hee saith hee knoweth not nor beleeveth, that the interrate John
Scrother is factor for any Merchants of Holland or udner the Jurisdiction of
the States interrate, And otherwise cannot depose, saving the said John
Scrother doth deale in merchandizing many times for his owne accompt.

To the 23:th hee saith, That being a Wynecooper by profession and trade
and by reason of his said profession and otherwise well knoweing the
quality of Vonterbanda goods betwixt Nation and Nation in hostility, hee deposeth
That Wynes are not nor ever were accompted as Contrebanda goods or un the
quality confiscable being seized by an enemy of that State, to whose Port they
were or are consigned for the accompt of free and Neutrall persons.

Jan Stueten Papa [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and
doctor Godolphin
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.192v Annotate
The 30th of November. 1653:

The Clayme of John Scrother for seaven and)
fortie butts of sacke in the shipp the black Cock)
John ffranson Haen Master Bud, Francklyn)

Examined upon the Allegation on the
behalf of the sayd Claymer:-

Jus

Jacob Wigandi of Hambrorough Merchant
aged 25. yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and
deposeth. That in or about the moneth of October 1652. last
the allegate John Scrother caused to be laden aboard the shipp the
black Cock, (John ffranson Haen Master) then lyeing at or neare
Lucars in Spaine seaven and forty butts of sherrie sack marked
with the marke in the margent to be transported in the said ship[?p]

'HK' [MERCHANT'S MARK, LH MARGIN]

to Amsterdam, and there to be delivered to Joachim Verpoorten ffactor [?or]
Correspondent to the said John Scrother for his the said John Scrother
the producents accompt and risque; And saith That for the reason[?s GUTTER]
subsequent hee well knoweth, That the said John Scrother was
and is and ought to bee the true and lawfull Owner of the said
seaven and fortie butts of sack, so laden and putt on board as aforesaid
Which said butts of sacke were bought and provided by the said John
Scrother with his owne moines goods or effects, And that the said John
ffranson ha[?e]n Master of the said shipp the black Cock at or about the
time of the lading of the said 47. butts of sack aboard the said shipp
did signe three bills of lading of one tenor for the receipt and [XXX]
of the same for the accompt aforesaid, Which hee knoweth for hee
this deponent being ffactor to the widdow and heires of hans [?Lemmerman]
of hamburgh, (whose factors and Correspondent the said John Scrother
and being here in London in or about the moneth of November: 165[?2]
last past received the said Producents letter inclosed in a letter [?from]
the said Lemmermanns. and importing that the said Producent intended
to lade a certaine quantity of butts of sack for his owne accompt
aboard the said shipp to be transported and delivered as aforesaid
And for that this deponent after the seizure of the said shipp received
a letter of advise together with two bills of lading was [XXXXX]
goods of the said Lemmermans laden on board the said shipp for [XXX]
accompt, and the other for the 47. butts of wyne predeposed
, laden aboard the said shipp as aforesaid
, And for that this deponent was
(acquainted
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.193r Annotate
acquainted with the firme of the said John ffransen Haen wherewith the said bill of lading was firmed And for that
this deponentby the especiall order of the said [?Lemmerswand] went expressely
to Medenblick in Holland in May 1653. to speake with the said John ffransen Haen
concernung the Cargo of his shipp so seized, whereupon the said John
ffransen Haen upon the sight and observation of the said bill of lading for
the wynes predeposed, affirmed to this deponent that the same was signed
together with two others of the same tenour by him the said John ffransen
Haen with his owne hand at Saint Lucars at or about the time of lading of the said
wynes, and further declared that another bill of lading of the same tenour
was on board his said shipp at the time of her seizure, which together
with his other papers were taken away by the Captaine or Companie of
the English man of warr that had taken his said shipp and her lading,
And further the said John ffransen Haen then also declared to this
deponent that the said John Scrother had laden aboard his said shipp the
said 47. butts of sack to be transported and delivered as aforesaid
And otherwise saith, That saving his following depositions hee cannot depose:

To the 5th and 5th and schedule or bill of lading therein mentioned but not
annexed hee saith and deposeth, That the said John Scrother is a hamburger
borne, and hath for 5. yeares last past of this deponents knowledge of him
by Correspondence resided as a ffactor for hamborough Merchants at
Saint Lucar in Spaine, by meanes of which his residence hee was and is a
Subject of the king of Spaine, and in that regard caused the bill of
lading predeposed to be made in the pretended name of diederick Cordes
a Burgher of hamborough, purposely to ffree the said wines from the
ffrench; And so much hee saith was and is usuall amongst Merchants; that
are inhabitants in, and Subjects of the king of Spaine to practize and doe for
the preservation of their goods from the Subjects of the king of ffrance or others
with whom the Spaniard is in hostility, And saith that the said diederick
Cordes who is a Native; a Merchant of great quality and Burgher of
hamborough, where hee hath held his Constant residence so long as this deponent
can remember; under whose borrowed name the goods in question are consigned,
hath according to a publique instrument which hee this deponent is ready to produce under
the seale of hamborough publiquely declared upon solemn oath before the Magistrates
there that the said wynes doe not at all belong unto him the said Diederick Cordes but to the said producent The premisses this deponent
declareth for that being a Merchant and Native of Hamborough, and factor to
the Lemmermans aforesaid, whose Agent or ffactor the said producent is,
the meanes of his relation and Correspondence aforesaid was and is very
well acquainted with the premisses, And otherwise saving his precedent and
subsequent depositions hee cannot depose./

(To the 6
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.193v Annotate
To the 6th hee saith, That to avoyde the Capture and Condemnation of [?goods]
consigned by the Subjects of the king of Spaine to Holland and other partes [?it]
is frequently used in the bill of lading to insert the names of free persons [?and]
Subjects of Hamburgh or other free places, and inhabitants there, when in [?truth]
and reality the goods so consigned doe absolutely belong to the said king of Spaine
his Subjects. And so much hee saith hee beleeveth to be [?notorious] and publique
amongst Merchants of any Nation in hostility with ffrance, who use the [?trade]
of Spaine. And further cannot depose.

To the 7th hee saith, That in the moneth of October 1652. arlate and for
some yeares before and to this present there was and is communication
and correspondence in the way of trade between the arlate John Scrother
and Joachim Verpoorten a ffactor or Merchant stranger residing at Amsterdam
who was and is named in the bills of lading predeposed. Which hee knoweth
being personally acquainted with the said Verpoorten, and by meanes of correspondence
well acquainted with the premisses./

To the 8th hee saith it is notorious, That the said shipp the black Cock under the
Conduct of the said John ffransen Haen being in her Course from Saint Lucar
aforesaid towards Amsterdam with the wines in question aboard her were
with the rest of her Cargazon surprized and taken by the Captaine and
Companie of the Speaker frigatt in the immediate service of this Common
wealth, and by them brought into England. And further cannot depose

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true:/

To the Crosse Interrogatories:/ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first negatively:-/

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate John Scrother [?XXX]
yeares by Correspondence who is well knowne and commonly reputed a
Native of Hamborough, and hath lived for 5. yeares and upwards at
Saint Lucar aforesaid, and is a Batchelour. [CHECK]

To the 3 hee was not at Saint Lucar at the time of the lading of the
butts of sack interrate, And therefore otherwise then as aforesaid hee cannot [?depose]

To the 4th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof, otherwise then by [?XXX]
of the said John Scrother, not being at Saint Lucar in the Voyage in question
And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition to which hee referreth hee
cannot depose./

To the 5th negatively:/

To the 6th hee saith by Vertue of his oath, that hee is for the reasons
predeposed, assured that the bills of lading aforesaid were made in the
borrowed name of the said diederick Cordes meerely for the reasons befpre
declared, And not otherwise./.

To the 7th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition

To the 8th hee saith hee is fully Convinced in Conscience that the 47.
butts of sack now Claymed doe really and soley appertane to the said
John Scrother and to no other person whatsoever/:

To the 9th hee saith hee this deponent is a Hamburger by birth and
(well
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.194r Annotate
usuall habitation. And otherwise negatively./

To the 10:th hee saith, That this deponent by the producent letters above said written to the said
Lemmermans whose factor hee is was acquainted that a certain quantity of butts of
wyne were to be laden as aforesaid for the said producents reckoning and riske aboard
the said shipp the black Cock, and the said Scrother in his said letter intimated
to the said Lemmermans, that forasmuch as hee had not goods and effects at that
time of theirs in his handes sufficient to returne them the said shipps full lading hee
therefore intended to make up the said shipps full lading with wynes for his owne accompt

To the 11:th he saith the shipp the black Cock begann her outwards Voyage from
Dantzick about the moneth of January or ffebruary 1652. full laden with pipestaves abd
Clapboards, none whereof was for the accompt of the said John Scrother, but
all for the accompt of the said Lemmermanns/

To the 12th hee saith, the lading interrate was all taken in at [?Polticherwicke] neare
Dantzick by the direction of one Abraham Bergensis of Dantsicke factor to the
said Lemmermans, this deponent being personally at Dantsick with the said Vergensis
when the Contract was made to that purpose And otherwise negatively

To the 13. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition./

To the 14:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof:-

To the 15: hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, And saith That the
bill of lading mentioned in the allegation and now interrate, being by the said Lemmermans
after the seizure of the said wynes sent to this deponent from Hamburgh to London,
this deponent hath sent the same from hence to Saint Lucar in Spaine annexed to a Commission from this
Court for the examination of Wittnesses in this Cause, which said bill of lading, as
this deponent was and is fully convinced in Conscience for the reasons predeposed was and
is one of the originall bills of lading for the said Wynes, And otherwise referring
himselfe to the said bill of lading hee cannot further depose:/:-

To the 16 hee saith hee himselfe first received the bill of lading interrate by the poast from Hamborough
And saith the same was directed to this deponent in a letter from the said Lemmermans/

To the 17:th hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Joachim Verpoorten for about 3
or 4. yeares last past, and saith hee is commonly accompted a High german by birth, and
hath lived all that time at Amsterdam as a factor or Merchant stranger And
otherwise negatively referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 18. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing depositions, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 19:th hee saith hee doeth not know nor hath ever heard amongst Merchants, That
when two States or nations are at warr one with another (especially the said warr not
being solemnely declared and published) All or any Wines whatsoever consigned and
sent by free persons to the Port or Ports of either Nation so in hostility there to be
discharged for the accompt of such free persons, are or ever were to be accompted Contraband
goods, or justly confiscable by any that seize them: And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 20. and 21.th hee saith, That saving his foregoing deposition, hee cannot give
any further satisfaction to the demannds of this Interrogatorie.

Jacob Wigandj [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke
and William Godolphin:-/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.194v Annotate
The first of december 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Libertie  et cetera and of William)
Melvill and others against the shipp the Supply)
Henry Oakes Commander against Mr Batson and)
others. Budd Suckley/)

Examined upon the Allegation on the behalfe of the
Keepers et cetera:-/

Budd dt./

Henry Oake of the parishe of Stepney in the
County of Middlesex Mariner aged 30 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined saith as
followeth videlicet:/

To the first article hee saith and deposeth, That in or about the 20th or
21th of September last past, the dammage allegate sustayned by the
shipp the Abraham arlate, of which James Leshly then was Master, happened
to the said shipp the Abraham then lyeing in the river of Thames by meanes
of her bilging upon a lost anchor then being neare unto the said shipp which
hee knoweth for that this deponent being Master of the shipp the Supply arlate
which at the time of the accident aforesaid lay in the river of Thames
in or about the middle of the Channell, and comeing the next morning
after the said accident aboard this deponents ship the Supply, found the
said shipp the Abraham suncke by the occasion aforesaid. And otherwise
saving his foregoeing depositions hee cannot depose:-/

To the 2. 3. and 4th articles hee saith and deposeth, That the next morning
after the dammage aforesaid happened the allate James Leshly Master
of the said Vessell the Abraham mett with this deponent in Mr [?John]
Yarwoods yard at Shadwell, and then and there the said Leshly declared to
this deponent that hee was undone, and this deponent asking him how, hee replyed
that his said shipp the Abraham was bilged upon an Anchor belonging to
a fire shipp lyeing neare to his said shipp, and that by occasion thereof his
said shipp was sunke, and that most of the goods laden therein were spoyled and dammaged
And further saith that the said Leshly then declared to this deponent that
hee the said Leshly was then goeing to procure an arrest to be made upon the
said fireshipp, and because hee had so mett with this deponent hee desired
to be informed who were the Owners of the said fire shipp whereupon this
deponent iformed the said Leshly that one Mr Cattlyne was one
of the Owners of the sayd fireshipp, or words to the effect aforesaid, att
which the said Leshly departed from this deponent and told him hee would [?goe ?to]
the said Mr Catline and speake with him about the accident or damage
sustained as aforesaid, and accordingly this deponent the same day saw the
said Leshly in Companie and discourse with the said Catline And
further saith, That upon the 24th of the said moneth of
September the arlate Walter fflint one of the parties in this Cause
and the said James Leshly and another who pretended to have an interest
in the shipp the Abraham aforesaid came to this deponents lodging at
New Gravell Lane in the parish of Stepney, and told this deponent that
the dammage sustained by the said shipp the Abraham [?XXXX]
([?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.195r Annotate
lading was occasioned by her bildging upon an Anchor of this deponents said
shipp the Supply, which, as they then pretended to this deponent lay under
the bough of the said shipp the Abraham, and desired this deponent to goe
along with them to help to gett the said anchor from under their said shipp,
which this deponent accordingly did, and being come to the said shipp the
Abraham this deponent and others in presence of the said Walter fflint James
Leshly and others felt with a boate hooke, and thereby certainely perceived
That there was an anchor lay soe close under the bough of the said shipp
the Abraham that they could not gett the iron of the boate hooke
between the said shippes bough and the anchor, by meanes of which anchor
the said fflint Lashly and others in this deponents presence and hearing acknowledged
that the said shipp the Abraham was sunke, and the sammage aforesaid
sustained, as indeed and in trueth this deponent then also well observed and
saw. The premisses this deponent declareth upon certaine knowledge, And
otherwise saving his following deposition hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 5:th and 6th hee saith, That the boyroape of the anchor predeposed being reached
by a boatehooke and brought to the view of this deponent and the said Leshley
fflint and others then present this deponent immediately declared to the said
Leshley and the rest then present, that the said boy roape did not att all
belong to any anchor appertaineing to his said shipp the Supply, and after
the weighing of the said Anchor this deponent with the said James Leshley
saw and observed the same to be a small anchor broaken in the shanck about
foure foot from the Crosse, and saith, That at the time of the weighing of
the broaken anchor aforesaid this deponent being in a boate with one of the
said Leshleys Companie, and being willing to give all possible satisfaction to
the said Leshley and all others concerned in the dammage aforesaid., went and
felt under water with a boate hooke for the anchor of this deponents said shipp
the Supply and found the same, videlicet the anchor of the Supply which then
was nearest unto the said shipp the Abraham at the distance of twenty
foure foote or thereabouts from the same further into the Thames, And
that there was no anchor appertaining to the said shipp the Supply
within such a distance from the said shipp the Abraham, as possibly
to doe any dammage or preiudice to the said Vessell. The premisses hee
deposeth upon his owne ocular observation. And otherwise saving his
following deposition hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 7:th and 8:th hee saith and deposeth, That about three or
four daies after the weighing of the broaken anchor aforesaid, this
deponent caused the anchor of the said shipp Supply then being nearer
to the said shipp the Abraham to be weighed, and found the same
to be clearer and freer from doing any dammage to the said vessell the
Abraham or sustaineing any bruise or Crush by the same, which in case
(the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.195v Annotate
the said shipp had bilged thereupon, either the said anchor must in all
probability have been crushed or bruised, or that the same must have
runne into or stucke in the said shipp, neither of which was done of this
deponents sight and certaine knowledge, And further saith, That the said shipp
the Supply in the moneths of June, July August and September last
past and before had noe more then fower anchors belongig to the same and
that at the time of the dammage sutained as aforesaid, two of the said
shipps anchors were in the same, and the third anchor was the about
one hundred foote distance from the said shipp the Abraham to the Southward
and the other videlicet the anchor of the said shipp Supply so weighed as
aforesaid, was then at the distance predeposed Northward, And saith
That the broaken anchor so found as aforesaid under the bough of the said
shipp the Abraham was a fifth anchor which did not at all belong to the said shipp
the Supply of this deponents certaine knowledge, being Master of the said shipp
the supply for all the time next predeposed: And otherwise cannot depose

To the 19:th hee saith, That hee this deponent was present together with
the said Leshly and others when the fflooke of the anchor arlate which
as the Cause of the dammage predeposed was taken up, [?and] upon the
takeing up of the same wished the said Leshly and others concerning the
said dammage to keepe the said fflooke or peece of an anchor tellinge
them hee beleeved it was all the reparation they were like to have for
their dammage sustained as aforesaid, And saith that notwithstanding
this deponent shortly after and severall times since enquired of the said
Leshley and others what was become of the said fflooke or peece of the
anchor with intent that the injustice of their pretence against the parte
producent in this Cause might thereby bee discovered, yet  hee thisd
deponent  could never since heare any newes of the same,/ And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true:-/:-

Hen: Oake

Repeated before doctor Clark and
doctor Godolphin:-/

See his answer to the Interrogatories in 'F.F.F.'

[REST OF THE MANUSCRIPT PAGE IS BLANK]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.196r Annotate
Z.Z./

3d of December 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Price against Smith)
ffrancklin Smith)

Rp

Thomas Dawes of Shadwell in
the parish of Stepney Mariner where
he hath lived five yeares, aged
about 30ty yeares, a wittnes produced
and sworne in this cause, and being
examined deposeth as followeth.

To the first article of the Libell given on and admitted in this cause he deposeth and saith
that he this deponent was Masters Mate in the shipp the West India Merchant in a voyage
to Virginia in the yeare 1651 arlate and that then the
arlate John Price was Owners and Proprietor of an
eight part of the said shipp the West India Merchant
And further he cannot depose.

To the 2d article he cannot depose.

To the third article of the said libell he deposeth and saith
that the arlate John Price did goe Master of the shipp the
West India Merchant in the voyage arlate and in this
deponents sight and observation the cheife care of
victualling and fitting out the said shipp for the
sayd voyage was in the said John Price and by him
performed And further he cannot depose.

To the fourth article and to the schedule therein mentioned in the
schedule was now shewen [?unto] and by this deponent precontest
he deposeth and saith that he being Masters Mate in the
voyage arlate well knoweth all the severall persons named
and particularised in the said first schedule and he beleiveth
they were all signed by the arlate John Price, And [?XX]
sayeth that the greatest Number of the sayd persons
were payd the respective summes sett downe in the
said schedule in the sight of him this deponent by the
sayd John Price, And that he this deponent (who is
the first man named in the said schedule did receive
for his wages due to him from him the arlate Price
the summe of 24 [?li] as is sett downe in the said schedule
which was due to him the deponent for 9 and 6 dayes wages
in the sayd shipp the voyage arlate, And that all the
said persons did serve in the said shipp the respective
times sett downe in the said schedule And further he
deposeth not.

To the fifth article he deposeth that the shipp arlate was
of the burthen of 120 Tonnes at the time of the sayd voyage
and that there were noe more than what was iustly [?convenient]
and necessary for the sayling of the said shipp in the said voyage
tahn the Company that were in her being the severall persons
named in the first schedule arlate
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.196v Annotate
at least are and maye be imployed in a voyage from
any Port of England to Virginia And further he
deposeth not.

To the sixth he sayth that at this present time there
are more wages given to persons of this quality
and condicons menconed in the said first schedule
then was given to the said persons in the said schedule, and
he sayth that at the time of the voyage arlate the producent
hyred all the sayd persons of this deponents knowledge
at the best and lowest rates he could And further
he cannot depose.

To the 7th article he deposeth that the ship the West India
Merchant arlate having in her divers goods laden and
some passengers in her and ready to goe upon her voyage
to Virginia about October 1651 arlate was commanded to attend upon the ffleet
reducing the Barbathoes, and that she being soe commanded
she was about three monthes in the States service
in the said employment, And further he deposeth not.

To the 8th he deposeth and sayth that upon hopes of
reducing the Barbathoes the said shipp the West India Merchant
was by the said John Prines meanes released from attending
the said ffleet and went upon her merchandising
voyage to Virginia, and that she arrived there about
the month of ffebruary 1651 arlate, and that the said
passengers and goods that were taken into her at
Southampton were all safely landed at Virginia
And further he deposeth not

To the nineth article, that the sayd shipp the West India
Merchant was upon her voyage homeward laden at
Virginia with Tobaccoes, the greatest part of the
Tobaccoes were of this deponents knowledge consigned by
the arlate Mr Hussey and Mr [?Paihorne] and
some other Merchants of Southampton And further he
deposeth not.

To the tenth article he sayth; that hee this deponent had
heard by the producent and others that the arlate [?Nicholas]
Smith hath received divers summes of money due for [?freight]
of goods and for carrying of passengers the voyage
arlate more then his due or proportionable part And
further he deposeth not.

To the eleaventh article and to the schedule [?XXX]
menconed he deposeth that of his this deponents knowledge
being Masters Mate as is predeposed) the voyage arlae [?XXX]
particulass menconed in the said schedule were [?had] [?XXX]
provided by the arlate John Prine and that all the [?XXXXXXX]
necessary, but what money it cost the said Prine for [?XXX]
he saith he knoweth not.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.197r Annotate
To the twelth article he saith that he this deponent was in the
sayd voyage from about October 1651 arlate untill
the month of July 1652, and that the said shipp the
West India Merchant was preparing for her sayd voyage
before he this deponent came to her And that during
all the said time the arlate John Price was Maseter
of her, and did carefully exequute the said place
And that 6 li per month is usually given to [?Masters]
upon a Virginia voyage which hee the sayd Price did very well
deserve And further he deposeth not./

To the 13th he cannot depose.

To the 14th he deposeth not.

To the 15th article he sayth that the producents eight
part of the shipp arlate when she came home the
voyage was worth in this deponents Judgement about
70 li And further he cannot depose.

To the 16th he cannot depose

To the 17th he sayth that he referreth himselfe to what
he hath formely deposed And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 18th 19. 20th and 21th he sayth that he
referreth himselfe to the Lawes, and to the Acts of
this Court And otherwise cannot depose

To the Interrogatoryes

To the first Interrogatory he answereth that he was desired to
come and testify his knowledge in this cause by the producent
who, whether he prevayles or is overthrowne in this cause
is neither profitt nor losse to this Rendent And
to the rest he answeres negatively.

To the 2d Interrogatory, that he was Masters Mate to the producent
arlate in the voyage predeposed of, and tha the producent
oayd him this Rendent his wages, And to the rest he
answereth negatively

To the 2 Interrogatory he answereth that he referreth himselfe
to his deposition made to the 3d article of the Libell And
otherwise he cannot answeare.

To the fourth Interrogatory he answereth that he was presnt
both at Southampton and in the Downes when the producent
hyred some of the mariners and agreed with them concersing
their wages And otherwise he cannot answeare.

To the fifth he answereth that before this voyage predeposed of
he this Rendent hath gone Masters Mate severall
voyages and in the absence of the Master hath sometimes hyred
Mariners and that they were all for Virginia voyages And
otherwise he answereth not.

To the sixth Interrogatory he saith that there was at the time that the
shipp the West India Merchant was ready to goe on her voyage
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.197v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

On the same day [CENTRE HEADING]

2)

William Potts of Newcastle in the County of Northum
=berland Mariner, where he hath lived about 6 yeares
aged about 20ty yeares a wittnes et cetera.

To the first article of the sayd Libell he deposeth and saith
that the arlate John Price the party producent was Owner
and Proprietor of an Eighth part of the West India
Merchant arlate in some monthes in the yeare 1651 arlate
vefore her going upon her voyage to Virginia, for this deponent
was present when he bought his said eight part of jer And
further he cannot depose.

To the 2d article he deposeth that the producent John Price
and the arlate William Smith did lett the said
shipp the West India Merchant to freight unto the
arlate Mr [?Pinhorne], Mr Stanley and others, who did
accordingly freight the same And further he deposeth not

To the 3d article he sayth that the arlate John Price did goe
Master in the voyage arlate of the said shipp the West India
Merchant, and did victuall and furnishe out his eighth
part of the said shipp, which this deponent well knoweth
being presente when it was done, nd further he cannot
depose.

To the fourth article and to the schedule therin menconed (which this
deponent now perused) he sayeth that the arlate John Price
being master of the West India Merchant arlate for the[?foresaid]
voyage hyred the severall persons particularized in the [?said]
schedule, for that this deponent well knoweth that ll the
sayd persons did serve in the sayd shipp the said voyage and
he this deponent was presente when the most of them
(were
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.198r Annotate
were hyred by the said John Peine, And that he
very well knoweth that divers of the rates of wages
sett downe in the said schedule were contracted for
betweene the said Peine and the Mariners and
accordingly payd, And further he deposeth not.

To the 5th he sayth that the sayd shipp was at the
time arlate of the burthen of 120 Tonns, and that
there could be a lesse Number then what was in
her the voyage arlate for the managing of her
And further he deposeth not.

To the sixth, and to the schedule therein mentioned he sayth
that at the time Libellate the rates (sett downe in the sayd schedule) of wages
payd to the Mariners the voyage arlate were then usuall, and
that now they are much encreasd, And that the party
producent for the Divers goods as well as his owne
hyrd men at as cheape a rate as he could And further
de deposth not

So the seaventh article he deposeth That the said shipp
the West India Merchant having divers goods and
many passengers on board her and 200 Leagues at Sea
on her voyage to Virginia was commanded to attend on and
assist a ffleet going to reduce the Barbathoes which shee
did, and that there were three monthes gone before the
said shipp could bee freed from the States=service
And further he cannot depose./

To the 8th he deposeth that after the release of the said
shipp from the service wherunto she was commanded she
proceeded upon her Merchandizing voyage to Virginia,
and that upon her arrivall there the passengers and
goods transported in her were safely landed, And
further he deposeth not.

To the 9th, that the Lading which the said shipp tooke in
at Virginia was Tobacco, and that the said Tobacco
was consigned to the arlate Hussey and [?Pinkhorne] and
other persons who dwelt at Southampton, And
further he deposeth not/

To the 10th article he deposeth that the said shipp
arrived safely at Southampton with her lading
in or about the month of June 1652, and that
she did there disccharge her Lading And further he knoweth
not to depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.199r Annotate
To the 17th article he sayth that the arlate John Price
did pay unto all the shipps Company their wages
as he did unto him this deponent, who was presente
when hepayd the rest, which he knoweth is due and
owing unto him the sayd Price, for that the arlate Smith
denyeth to come to an Accompt with him, and alsoe that
the moneys are owing unto the sayd Price, which he layd
out for the shipps provisions, and alsoe for the
freight of the sayd shipps eight part which is the said Prices And further
he cannot depose./

To the 18th 19 and 20th articles he sayeth that he
referreth himselfe to the Lawes and t the Registry
and acts of this Court, And otherwise he knoweth
not to depose.

To the Interrogatories

To the first he answereth that he cometh at the
request of the producent to testify his knowledge in this
cause, and that he being payd his wages for the voyage
it will be nether profitt or losse which side soever prevayle
And otherwise he answereth negatively./

To the 2d Interrogatorry he sayth that he is an Apprentise to
the party producent, and hath about half a yeare to
serve him, And to the rest he answers negatvively/

To the third Interrogatorry he cannot answeare./

To the fourth Interrogatorry he answereth that he was present
when the producent hyred some of the Mariners, and agreed with the about their wages And further he answereth not

To the fifth he answereth that he went divers voyages
before the voyage in question, And otherwise he answers
negatvely.

To the sixth he answereth that he saw noe such order
or warrant as is interrate.

To the 7th he referreth himselfe to his deposicon And
otherwise cannot answear.

To the 8th he answers negatively.

To the ninth and tenth Interrogatoryes he answereth that he
referreth himselfe to his former deposition And
otherwise he cannot answeare.

William Potts [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Dr Clarke}
and Dr Godolphin./)
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.199v Annotate
6th of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

3)

John Chamberlayne of Southampton, Apprentice
to Captayne Price the producent, aged 17 yeares
a wittnes produced, and sworne, and being examined
deposeth as followeth./

To the first article of the Libell given ina nd admitted on the
sayd Prices behalfe he the deponent sayth that in the yeare
1651 arlate hee came to the arlate John Price as a servant
and Apprentice, and that he the said Price was then an
Owner of an eight part of the shipp the West India
Merchannt Libellate of his this deponents knowledge, And further
he deposeth not

To the 2s and third articles he deposeth and saith that the shipp
arlate was lett to freight by the arlate John Price the producent and
 William Smith towards the latter end of the yeare `1651 unto the
arlate Pinkholme and Stanley, for a voyage from Southampton
to Virginia and backe againe And that the sayd John Price
the producent did goe master of the said shipp the said
voyage and that he did furnish and victuall only his eight parte
thereof, And further he deposeth not

To the fourth article of the said Libell and to the schedule therein mencconed
he deposeth that he having diligently perused the said schedule at this
his time of examination well knoweth that all the persons particularized
in the said schedule did serve in the said shipp the voyage Libellate
and that they were and are all payd by the producent, for that
of his knowledge some of them were payd and he hath heard
that they were all payd by him, And further he deposeth not./

To the fifth article he deposeth and saith that the shipp arlate was of the
burthen of (about) 130 Tonns, and that a lesse Number of men
than what were in her and are particularisezed in the schedule arlate
could not conveniently have sayled and managed her the said voyage
And further he cannot depose.

To the sixth article and to the said schedule (being the first schedule
therein mentioned he  deposeth that he having perused the rate of the
wages of the mariners putt downe in the said schedule, that they
were all the time Libellate the usuall and customary wages paid
to Mariners for the voyage arlate, And that at the present they
are much encreasd. And otherwise he deposeth not.

To the seaventh article he sayth that in or about the month of October
1651 arlate the said shipp having in her, her lading of goods, and
some passengers and being at sea upon her voyage to Virginia
was commanded to attend  upon acoompany the fleet going (by order of [?Parliament]
to reduce the Barbathoes, and that the said shipp the West India
Merchant arlate did accordingly attend the said fleete but how long
he saith he knoweth not, And further he knoweth not.

To the wighth article he sayth that upon probable hopes of reducing the
said Island of  the Barbathoes the producent did labour for [?XX]
[?procure] permission for the shipp the West India Merchant arlate
to proceed upon her voyage to Virginia, where she safely arrived
andlanded her goods and passengers And further he deposeth not

To the ninth he sayth that ther said shipp did take in her lading
at Virginia, which was tobaccos and that they were consigned to
the arlate Hussey and Pinkhorne, and alsoe to Mr Stanley at
Southampton, And further he deposeth not

(To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.200r Annotate
To the tenth article of the sayd Libell and to the schedule therin
mencconed he deposeth and saith that the shipp arlate about the
month of June, or July 1651 arrived safely at Southampton
and there discharged her lading, And further he cannot
depose

To the eleaventh article of the said Libell and to the schedule
therin mencconed which he the deponent well perused at the time
of his examination he sayth that he very well knoweth (being
on board the said shipp in the voyage arlate) that all the
particulars mencconed in the said schedule was provided for
the shipps use by the producent, and that they were
all but very necessary and usefull, and of his knowlesdge
had on board the said shipp by the care and provision
of the said producent but that he did not see him
pay for them And further he deposeth not.

To the 12th article he saith that the said John Price the
producent, did goe master or Commander of the shipp arlate
in the sayd voyage which about 9 or 10 months, and that
he did exequute his place carefully, and that the usuall
salary of a master or Commanderof a ship of the like burthen
as the shipp arlate was of, is 6 li per month And
further he deposeth not.

To the 13th and 14th he cannot depose.

To the 15th article he sayth that the eight part of the
shipp arlate was valued worth 70 li And further he
deposeth not

To the 16th he saith that sicne the arlate Smith hath had
the said ship, he hath (as this deponent hath heard) sent her
to Sea, and not suffered the producent to come into her
And further he deposeth not

To the 17th he referreth himselfe to what he hath predeposed
And further he cannot depose./

To the 18th 19th and 20th articles he sayth that he referreth
himself to the Lawes and to the Registry of this Court And
otherwise he knoweth not to answeare./

To the interrogateryes

To the first

To the fourth

To the fifth

To the sixth

To the 7th

To the 8th

To the 9th and 10th

Repeated before Dr Clarke
and Dr Godolphin./

John [?XXXXton] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.200v Annotate
The 7th day of december 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Chelston and others against the shipp the)
great Christopher et ctera. Smith Suckley)

Examined upon an Allegation made in the
Acts of Court by Suckley on the behalfe of the
Owners of the said shipp and her ladeing and the [?SCHEDULE]
[?XXXX], therein mentioned:-/

John Pruyse of Riga in Lieffland under the
domonion of the Queene of Sweden, Merchant
aged 40. yeares or thereabouts sworne before the
Judges of the High Court of Admiralty saith and
deposeth./

That the schedule or Certificate allegate now shewne to this deponent at ye
time of his examinationa nd read over to him in	the dutch tongue, and the
signature or subscription thereof diligently observed by him, was and is a reall
and true Certificate drawne up by the especiall order and direction of the
Right Honorable Generall Monck, and subscribed with his ye said Generalls
owne handwriting, and saith that the Contents of the said Certificate were
and are true and so had and done as therein is contained, and according to ye
date therein expressed Which premisses this deponent well knoweth, for that this
deponent being the Merchant mentioned in the said schedule or Certificate
allate was and is the person at whose instance ye said Certificate was obtained
for the confirmation of the trueth of the Cause depending in this Court
concerning the said shipp the great Christopher and her lading, and was
personally present when ye said Generall gave order for the drawing up of the
said Certificate, and saw him subscribe the same with his owne hand, And
otherwise cannot depose./

Repeated before Dr Clarke and)
Dr Godolphin)

Johen Pruyse [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 8th of December 1653 uppon the allegations given on the
behalfe of Henry Wilke

The Clayme of Henry Wilkee of Edinburgh in Scotland)
for twelve bayles of Lynnen seized on board the)
shipp the Three Kings of Hamborough whereof)
[?XXXXX XXXX] was Comannder by the Saphir)
ffrigott whereof Captayne Heaton was Comannder}
Suckley Smith)	

Jus.

John Denholme of Edinburgh in
Scotland merchant aged about 27 yeares
a witnesse produced and examined in this Court
Deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first second and third articles of the said allegation and to the exhibit or bill
of ladeinge therein menconed shwen unto and perused by him this deponent att the tyme
of his examination he sayeth and deposeth That he this deponent and the producent
Henry Wilkee have lived in Spayne for the space of theis three yeares last past or 
therabouts in the quality and condicon of merchants and came in company [?of]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.201r Annotate
said producent from Cadiz in Spayne as Passenger in the shipp the Rosario of
Lubeck on or about the tenth of June last past and arrived att Sant Malloes in
ffrance on or about the sixth of July then next followeing and the sayd producent brought with him
ffor his owne accompt severall parcells of money in peeces of eight and soe neere as he can guesse about fowre
thousand peeces of eight which money he sayeth uppon the said producents arrivall att Saint
Malloes and dureing his stay there which was for about three monethes was invested in Lynnen cloath Amongst which
hee sayeth That there was laden aboard the Shipp the three Kinges of Hamborow
arlate by the order and direction of the said Henry Wilkee to be transported in the
said shipp and to be delivered to Mr James Wilkee the said producents brother
resident att Cadiz arlate twelve bales of Lynnen cloth marked and
numbred as in the margent Which goods he sayeth here in the full and absolute

[?XXX] 17:
[?XXXXX] to: 6]
[?XXX 2 to: 4.]
[MARKES IN LH MARGIN]

possession of the said producent att the tyme of the Lading thereof and committing
the same to the charge of Joachim Beane the master of the said shipp of this deponents
sight and knowledge being present att the buyeinge of divers of the said Lynnens
and was an Eyewitness of the Ladeing of the said goods as
afforesaid and further to the said articles and schedules he cannot depose being not
present at the firmeing of the Bills of Ladeinge arlate.

To the fowerth article of the said allegation he sayeth and desposeth That shortly
after the Ladeing of the twelve bales of Linnen predeposed the said Mr Henry
Wilkee the producent came over from Saint Malloes to London and was there
 att this deponents first comeing over in October last being taken in the shipp the thre Kinges And
brought to London where he found the said producent And further cannott
depose saveing that the same producent is an Inhabitant of Edinbrough

To the 6th article of the said allegation he sayeth and deposeth That the said producent
and he this deponent for his owne account did lade theire goods aboard the shipp
the thre Kinges arlate for that the said shipp was knowne to bee [?XXX] shipp
belongeing to a Port in amity with this Common wealth And sayeth That
hee this deponent was aboard the said shipp the thre Kinges att the time of her
seizure but syaeth that the producent was not then there, and therefore altogether
[?XXXXX] in the shooteing att any of the shipps of this Comon wealth
neither was this deponent any way aydeing directing or abetting to
any such act being onely a passenger in the said shipp as aforesaid And further
cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatorryes [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatory he answearth as above and further knoweth not

To the second Interrogatory he  answeareth That he this rendent and the producent resident
att Saint Malloes afforesaid for the space of thre monethes or thereabouts [?a ffore]
theire comeing out of Spayne And otherwise then he hath predeposed
he knoweth not

To the third Interrogatory he answeareth That the [?XXX] Mr Wilkee was and is comonly reputed
to be a Scotch man borne and hath lived at Edinborough for the greatest part of
theis tenne yeares last past being commonly reputed a Marchant and living there
with his brother And further knoweth not

(To

~~~
HCA 13/68 f.201v Annotate
To the 5th Interrogaterry he sayeth That the interrate Henry Wilkee did himself in
person helpe and was present att the Ladeing of the Packs of Linnen predeposed
And otherwise then as abovesaid hee cannot answeare

To the 6th Interrogaterry hee answeareth That hee this deponent did heare the said Henry Wilkee
acknowledge that the said goods were laden aboard the said shipp for his owne
accompt and were consigned to his brother in Cadiz as before said And further he
knoweth not

To the 7th and 8th Interrogaterrys hee answeareth That hee is absolutely cconfirmed in his
conscience That the Bill of Ladeing was and is true and reall and
alltogeather uncolourable

To the 9th hee answeareth That as to his beleife hee is certaynly assured
not any Dutchman or Subiect of the States of the United Provinces either directly
or indirectly was or is interressed in the goods interrate and further cannot answeare

To the tenth Interrogaterry he answeareth That by birth hee is a Scotchman and liveth
for the most part when hee is not beyond the Seas att Edinburgh where his
father now liveth and otherwise negatively

To the 11th: 12: 13: 14 15. Interrogaterrys hee answeareth That he hath satisfyed the
contents thereof fully in his foregoeing depositions and otherwise then therein
is expressed hee knoweth not

To the sixteenth hee answeareth that hee knoweth not nor ever heard any auch agreement as is
interrate And otherwise saveing his followeing depositions hee cannot answeare

To the 17th he answeareth That att and in the tyme of the Fight betweene the Saphi
ffrigott and the thre Kinges  interrate there were seaven french ships in company [?which XXX]
the ffrench Cullours and the shipp ye thre Kinges interrate bore ye Hamborough
Cullours and the said Saphirt ffrigott wore the Cullours of this Comonwealth
And further cannot answeare

John Dunhorne [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Dr Clerk}
and Dr Godolphin)
----
The nyneth day of December 1653 uppon the
allegation given on the behalfe of the Claymers

The Clame of John [?derholme] of Edinburgh in Scotland)
merchant for twelve bales of Lynnen cloath of the marke)
hereunder written and one hundred bagges of wheate without)
marke seized in the Shipp the Three Kinges whereof)
Joachem Beane was master by the Saphir Frigott)
whereof [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Heaton was Commander in the)
Service of the Common Wealth Suckley. Budd.)

1 jus)

Henry Wilkee of
Edinburgh in Scotalnd
aged about 26 yeares [?XXXX]
produced and examyned in this
Cause deposeth as followeth

To the first and second articles of the  said allegacon hee sayeth and deposeth that
hee this deponent hath lived att Cadiz in Spayne for the space of three yeares or
therabouts where the producent Mr John Denholme lived for all the time predeposed
in the quality of a merchant and hath kknowne the said Mr Dunholme for the
space of tenne yeares last past hee this deponent and the said producent being
Countrey men borne in Scotlandand familiarly likewise acquainted during
the tyme of thire stay and Liveinge in Cadiz afforesaid. And sayeth There
in or about the moneth of June last pst hee this deponent together with
the said producent did imbarque themselves in a shipp called Saint
Rosario of Lubeck arlate for Saint Malloes in ffrance In which shipp this
(deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.203r Annotate
predeposed for his part 

[ADD DATA]
----
The 12th of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

2

Symon Pargents of Cadiz in Spayne Merchant
aged 27 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced annd
examined in this cause deposeth as followeth

To the first second third and 4th articles of the said allegation and the schedule
or bill of Ladinge therein mentioned beinge shewen unto him att the time
of his examination hee sayeth and deposeth That hee knew the producent
John denholme for the space of a moneth next procedinge this deponents
and the said producents imbarqueing themselves on the shipp the [?Rosario]
of Lubeck arlate wherein he sayeth in or about the moneth of June last
past he this deponent came in company with the foresaid John [?dXXXhelme]
the producent and an other Scotchman whose name was Henry  from Cadiz in Spayne where this deponent liveth bound
for Saint Malloes in ffrance where they arrived safely in or about the
moneth of July last past And sayth That the said producent att
his cominge from Cadiz brought with him a great quantity of silver in
peeces of eight in baggs but the certayne number thereof he
cannot tell but sayeth That uppon the said producents arrivall with
the said money att Saint Malloes the said producent did [?XXXX] the same in
Lynen and [?XXX] but how many bales of Lynen he bought therewith he cannot particularly
depose but sayeth That of this deponents sight and knowledge the said
producent caused to be Laden an Hamborough vessell being the 3 Kings [?XXXX] lying then near
Saint Malloes arlate the said Bales of Lynen and certayne quality  of
wheate which as he remembreth was about tenne tonnes which Lynnen and wheat
he sayeth was to have beene transported from Saint Malloes afforesaid
[?XXXX] in Spayne and there to be delivered to him the said [?producent]
for
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.204r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the tenth Interrogaterry he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing Depositions and
otherwise negatively to any interest in the goods or comodityes
predeposed or to any relacon of kindred to the producent

To the 11th hee knoweth nothinge thereof

To the 12th and 13th Interrogaterryes he knoweth notthinge thereof

To the 14. 15 Interrogaterryes he koweth nothinge thereof

To the 16th Interrogaterry hee answeareth That there came seaven shipps out of Saint
Malloes when the said shipp the thre Kinges sett sayle from thense and were
in company with her att the time of the ffight and seizure interrate but knoweth
not of any such agreementa s is Interrate nor ever knewe any thing to the effect
interrate

To the 17th Interrogaterry he answeareth that the thre Kinges never did shoote onely one shott or two and had
a redd Ensigne in the poope and the rest of teh shipps had severall collours the french ships had the ffrench Cullours and otherwise cannot remember nore depose saveing
that the shipps which did fight did all escape save one shipp called the Saint John de
Grace

Simon [?XXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Henry Wilkee of Edinburgh)
in Scotland for twelve bales of Lynnen)
seized on board the ship the three kinges)
of Hamburgh of which Joachim was master and)
Commannder by the Saphir ffrigott in the)
Service of the Comon Wealth)

Symon Paryents of Cadiz in Spayne merchant
aged 27 yeares or thereabouts Witnesse sworne
likewise and examined in this Court deposeth as
followeth.

To the first second third fowerth and fifth articles of the said allegation and to
the schedule therein mentioned he deposeth That he this deponent
hath lived and beene an Inhabitant of and in the City of Cadiz in Spaye for
theis 6 yeares and hath had a wife and family there for theise eighte yeares last past and was in the [?XXX] and quality of a
merchant and sayeth that no [?XXX] himselfe att [?XXXX] a board the Rosario a Shipp of Lubeck arlat
about June last past and arrived att Saint Malloes in ffrance in the
moneth of July last past beinge a passenger and coming from Cadiz aforesaid
the Company of the producent Henry [?Wilkie] a Scotchman and John
[?Denhosmer] and other Scotchman

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.204v Annotate
deponent did lade certayne goods aboard the said shipp for his owne
accompt at Saint Malloes as afforesaid which together with other of teh said shipps
Ladeing taken in there were to have beene delivered att Cadiz, and Saint Lucars
in Spayne according as they were consigned by the owners thereof and
the said shipp and her Ladeing  had not been intercepted and seizued in her
goeing thither which hee knoweth being aboard the said shipp the thre Kinges att the tyme
of her seizure and bringeing in to Plymouth.

To the Crosse Interrogatorries


To the first interrogatorry he answeareth That saveing his foregoeing Depositions to which
hee referreth himselfe hee cannot answeare

To the second

To the third

To the 4th: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9. Interrogatorryes he knoweth nothing thereof
[ADD DATA]

To the tenth and 11th Interrogatories hee answereth That hee was borne att [?Bitnis] in [?Aragon] and
is a Subiecct of his Catholique Majesty of Spayne and hath lived att Cadiz in
Spayne with his wife and family for theis 8 yeares last past

[ADD DATA]
----
the thirteenth day of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

3

Joochym Beene master of the Shipp the three Kings of
Hamborough aged fower and thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnesse produced and examyned in the [?interrogatoryes] as
followeth videlicet
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.205r Annotate
To the first second and third articles of the said allegation and to the schedule or Bills
of Ladinge therein mentioned beinge shewne unto him att the tyme of his examination and
casually perused by him hee saith and deposeth that he this deponent hath bene  master of
the shipp the three Kings of Hamborough arlate for theis eight monethes
last past or thereabouts which shipp he sayeth lay in or neere the Port of Saint Malloes
arlate in or about the moneth ofAugust last past. when and where this deponent
sayeth That there were Laden aboard the said Shipp by the producent
Henry Wilkee for the accompt of Jaques Wilkee the said producents brother
livinge att Cadiz in Spayne twelve bales of Lynen cloth marked and numbred as
in the margent for which bales he this deponent with his owne hand did firme and
signe the Bill of Ladeing in the said alleagtion mentioned And sayeth
That accordingly the said twelve bales of Linnen were laden and putt aboard
his this deponents said shipp to be delivered to the said producents brother
Jaques Wilkee att Cadiz afforesaid which by Gods permission this deponent had
accordingly performed if the said Shipp and her ladeing had not beene taken
and seised by the Saphir ffrigott whereof the arlate Captayne [?Henton] was Comander
whoe brought the said Shipp and her Ladeing as Prize into Plymouth with two
other ffrench Shipps which were taken by him when the said Shipp the
three Kings was surprized and taken as afforesaid the premisses he
deposeth for truth for that he this deponent was master and Comander of the
said Ship the three Kings att the tyme of her seizure predeposed and as [?XXXX]
the bill arlate to be firmed by and with his this deponents owne hand
writing uppon thereof of the goods predeposed And more or further  he
cannot depose saveing that the contents of the said bills of Ladeinge were and
are true and reall and soe had and done as is conteyned

To the fourethand fifth articles of the said allegation he sayeth and deposeth That
as this deponent was informed after the Ladeing of the said Lynnen the
producent Henry Wilkee went over Land for England And otherwise
he cannot depose saving that the Shipp the three Kings arlate was and is
a free shipp belonging to Hamborough and soe comonly knowne and
reputed And otherwise saveing his depositions hereafter followeing he cannot
depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatory That hee this rendent bought the shipp the three kinges
aforesaid att Middleburgh in Zealand where this deponent first came
aboard of her having bought the said shipp for the accompt of this rendent and
one ffrancis Sloyer liveing both in Hamborough and [?not] otherwise
saveing his precedent depositions hee cannot answeare.

To the second Interrogatory he answereth That the interrate Henry Wilkee the producent
did come aboard the [?XXX] sayd shipp to sea and look after the Ladeing
[?his] [?stockings] of his said goods predeposed att Saint Malloes afforesaid And
further cannot answere

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.205v Annotate

To the third Interrogatorry he canot answeare more then that by common report the
producent is accompted to be a Scotchman

To ye fourth hee answeareth That the Lynnen predeposed was bought in Saint Malloes
afforesaid but of whome hee knoweth not And further cannot answeare

[ADD DATA]

To the 10 and 11th Interrogatoryes hee answeareth That he this rendent was and is
an Hamburgher borne and hath a wife and family there now liveing [?in ?the]
[?hopXX] And otherwise negatively

[ADD DATA]

Repeated before Dr Dodolphin and Dr Clarcke/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.206r Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of John denholme of Edinburgh)
in Scotland merchant for twelve bales of)
Lynnen cloath and an hundred bagges of)
wheate without marke seized in the)
three kinges of Hamborough by the Saphir)
ffriggott Suckley Budd)

3./

Joachim Beane afforesaid examyned in
this Court likewise deposeth as followeth

To the first second third and fowreth articles of the said allegation and to
the schedule therein mentioned being shewen unto him att the time of his
examination hee sayeth and Deposeth That hee this deponent hath beene
Skipper of the Shipp the three Kinges of Hamborough arlate for theis
eight-monethes last past or thereabouts which hee sayeth hee this deponent bought
att Middleborough in Zealand for the accompt of ffrans Sloyer and him
this deponent And sayeth That the said Shipp in or about the moneth
of August last past lyeing att Saint Malloes as arlate the producent John
denholme being then there for his owne adventure and accompt did cause to be
laden aboard the said shipp twelve Bales of Lynen cloth marked as in the

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

[THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

margent and 100 baggs of wheate without marke and 40 baggs marked with the second marke in the margent which this deponent receaved aboard his said shipp to be therein
transported to Saint Lucar in Spayne and thereuppon did firme and signe
the Bill of Ladeing arlate exhibited in this cause which haveinge perused
diligently att the time of his examination hee acknowledgeth the same
to be firmed by and with this deponents owne hand writeing and to be
one of the three bills of the same tenor which hee this rendent firmed att
Saint Malloes uppon the Ladeing of the said Lynnen and Wheate predeposed
but sayeth That the producents name was not used nor inserted in the same
Bill of Ladeing but the name of Jan Cornelius by reason That (as the
said producent informed him this deponent) the said producent was necessitated
to use an other name instead of his owne for
some private reasons knowne onely to himselfe and
further cannot depose saveinge That hee the said producent John
denholme did imbarque himselfe aboard his this deponents said shipp
with the Lynnen and Corne predeposed for Spayne whether hee this
deponent  intended his said voyage if the same had not bene hyndered
by the seizure of the said Shipp and her Lading by the Saphyr friggott
arlate And further cannot depose saving That all the forty baggs of
wheate above mentioned and marked as abovesaid were bought and Laden by
the producents order and direction yett hee sayeth they were not mentioned
in the said Bill of Ladeinge for that the said producent had promissed to
allowe him this deponent the proffitt of the said fortie baggs of wheate
att the btinging and sale thereof in Spayne

To the fifth article of the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth That the
producent

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.207r Annotate
the three kings or not so long before there were seaven shipps in Company
with her being ffrench men three whereof hee sayeth [?XXXXX] to fight with
the Saphir ffrigott interrate for the spece of five or six howres or
thereabouts and sayeth That hee this dendent recoming out of the Port of
Saint Malloes with the said ffrenchmen and beinge in company
did shoot five or six gunns at randome att the Saphir Frigott
interrate which hee beleeveth was noe way endamaged or hurt thereby
but that hee was threatned by some aboard the said ffrench
Shipps that If he this rendent would not fire att the English ffrigott
tat they would fire or shoot att him or to that purpose And
as to the agreement  [?XXXX] her answeare [?XX] negatively as [?XXXXing]
but particuler and as to the generall report interrate he knoweth nothing thereof
nor hath heard And further cannot answeare

To the 17th hee answeareth That att the tyme of the seizure of the three
Kings interrrate the said Shipp did weare the Hamborough Colloures
and the ffrench Shipps he sayeth did fight inder their owne Collours
And the Saphir ffrigott fought under the English Colloures/

Repeated before doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin:-/

Jochim [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
16th December 1653 uppon the allegation given on the
behalfe of the Claymer. [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of Alonzo da Syerra)
[?XXX XXX] [?Machuca] for the Tobachoes)
[?XXX] in the Salvadore et cetera.

Michael [?Stevas] of [?Vallenie] in Pomerland Quarter master of the
Shipp the Salvadore aged 29. yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced
and examyned in this Cawse deposeth as followeth

To the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth That hee this deponent was [???man]
of the Shipp the Salvadore in the allegation mentioned and present aboard
the said Shipp at Cadiz in Spayne about eighteen or 17 monethes sithence when and where there
were laden aboard the said shipp severall potacchoes or [?Sernes] of Tobacoho
but the number or quantity thereof hee cannot say some whereof were

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marked with the marke in the margent and some of them unmarked
but how many of each hee cannot say buut sayeth some of the said Tobaccoes were
taken aboard the said shipp for the accompt and adventure of the producent
Alonzo de Ayerra Bargo, merchant and sawe a younge man [?XXXXXXXX] [?conceived] to be the sonne of the said Alonzo de Syerra
aboard the said shipp after the Stoweing
the said Tobaccoes some of which this deponent sawe the said [?Peeter]  marke with the mark of a [?XXX]
but for that the said [?Petar [?XXXX] [?XXXXg] stowed it was exceedingly troublesome and could [?not]
possibly
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.207v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 17th of December 1653 uppon the allegation given in on
behalfe of the Claymer.

The Clayme of John Martyn merchannt of)
Saint Lucars in Spayne for the goods in the)
Shipp the three Kinges of Hamborough)
whereof Joachim Beane was master taken by)
some of the Parliaments Shipps and brought into)
Plymouth Smyth Budd)

Symon Parente of Cadiz in Spayne
merchannt aged about 27 yeares a witnesse
produced and examined in this cause

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.209v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

----
The 20th of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

John Thomas of Cadiz in Spayne where he
lived for the greatest part of his life beinge there borne aged
23 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced and examined
deposeth as followeth.

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegacon he
sayeth and deposeth That he hath well knowne the producent John Martyns both in the
West Indies and Spayne for theis fower yeares last past or thereabouts and sayeth that
the sayd John Marthyns hath beene a Shopkeeper and Inhabitant of Saint Lucars
for the most prt of the time predeposed and commonly reputed a Subiect of his
Catholique Majety of Spayne And sayeth That in or about the moneth of August [?last]
hee this deponent came from Cadiz in Spayne to Saint Malloes arlate in [?the]
same shipp and arrived there in or about the beginning of September last and
dureing theire stay and aboade at Saint Malloes afforesaid they both had [?XXX]
most part together att one and the same lodging being by reason thereof [?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.210r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the seaventh article of the said allegatio he deposeth and sayeth That the arlate
Berard Mitchelolt haveing laden aboard the Shipp the three kinges arlate
the severall and respective bales of Lynnen. marked as is arlate
on or about the 2[?5]th day of September 1653 arlate did really and truelly
for and in consideration of the [?XXX] sume of 7280 livre Turnoiis
att Saint Malloes afforesaid did really and truely
sell assigne and transfer into the arlate John Martynes the producent eighteene
bales of Lynnen marked with 'GM' and allsoe
twoe bales of Lynnen marjed with 'CH' and as for the other bale marked with
'CH' as is arlate hee sayeth That hee this deponent being aboard the
three kings arlate did heare the arlate [?Mounsyer] [?XXX] [?XXXX]
att sea that  he had assigned and sould the said third bale unto the producent
John Martynes the premisses hee knoweth being present when the said John
Martynes did pay the sume of money afforesaid to the said Bernard
Mitchelott

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.211r Annotate
To the nyneth Interrogatory hee answereth and beleeveth That the goods now claymend doe
properly and truely belong to the foresaid John Martyns and none other [?either] dutchman
or ffrenchman

To the tenth hee answeareth That hee this rendent is by byrth a Spanyard and liveth for
the most part in Spayne and otherwise negatively

To the 11th hee knoweth nothinge thereof

To the 12th hee answeareth That the Bills of Ladeinge interrate were and are the same which
hee this rendent sawe [?XXXX] and firmed att Saint Malloes by Bernard Mitchell and
Joachim Beane as is predeposed. And further knoweth not

To the thirteenth hee knoweth not any thinge thereof more than as abovesaid

To the foureteenth hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing Deposition s and further
knoweth not savinge That there were some goods Laden aboard the said shipp for
this rendents owne accompt and friends , to say (25) Ballotts./

To the 15th and 16th hee answeareth That more to this Interrogatory then what hee hath predeposed [?concearning]
the fight interrate hee knoweth not

To the 17th hee answareth That the French shipps afforesaid did hang out the ffrench
collours and the three Kings [?interrate] did weare the Hamborough collours and the Saphir
ffrigott did weare the English collours

To the 18th Interrogatory hee answareth That [?Bearnarde] Mitchell interrate was and
is knowne and commonly reputed to be a ffrenchman who had an intention
to goe for Spayne but beinge diverted from his intended purpose did sell his said
goods unto the foresaid John Martyns as afforesaid And further knoweth not

To the 19th hee answeareth That the interrate Mitchell was not aboard
the three Kings att the time of her seizure./

Juan Tomas Milute [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]
----
23rd December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING

Joachim Beane master of the Shipp the Three kinges
whereof he hath beene master for theis 8 moneths or thereabouts
aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced and examined
in this cause deposeth as followeth

To the first article of the said allegation he sayeth and deposeth That he hath well
knowne the producent John Martynes for theis fower yeares last past he this deponent
useing to trade to Cadiz and Saint Lucar and other parts of Spayne and thereby came acquainted first
with the said producent whoe for all the time predeposed hath beene and is
commonly knowne and reputed to be an Inhabitant of Saint Lucar and a Subiect
of his Catholic Majesty of Spayne And further cannot depose

To the second and third articles of the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth That
within the time and in one of the monethes arlate the said John Martyns
was and remayned att Saint Malloes in ffrance att which Port hee sayeth That in
or about the end of September arlate new style there were laden aboard
the shipp the three Kinges arlate whereof he this deponent was and is master
twoe fardells or Packs of Linnen cloath marked with the first mark
in the margent which goods hee sayeth That hee this deponent receaved from the
said
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.212r Annotate
A.A.A.

4 of November 1653.

Captaine Richard Stainier Commannder of the shipp the
fforesight in the service of this Commonwealth, aged 28
yeares or thereabouts sworne in Court before the three Judges
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath

That hee this deponent the eighth of September last or thereabouts on the
coast of Jutland in the said frigot the fforesight mett with and tooke a
huoy of Euchusen laden with timber and having aboard alsoe (as the
master of her told him) foure tonnes of potashes and that this deponent
examined the said master and company of the said huoy, and found by their
confession then the said vessell and lading were belonging to Euchusen and to
subiects of the States of the United Netherlands. And further that upon the said
seizure hee gave command to one John Bourne a midshipman to take
command of te said prize and to keepe some of her company aboard
to the end to have them examined, but hee the said Bourne contrary to this
deponents aid order sent all the said company aboard the fforesight
and suddenly after a storme which separated the said frigot and
prize, soe that this deponent had not any oportunitie of sending backe
any of the said company aboard the said prize, which hee hath not
seene since they were soe parted, but hath heard that shee was brought
into harwich.

Rich: Stayne [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The seventh day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers against the 20. shipps in the
Hamburgh ffleet.

Examined uppon the sayd allegation

6

Claes van Roton of Hamburgh Mariner master of the
sayd shipp the Brewer aged six and fifty yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That upon tuesday
the 27th day of September last past the foresayd shipp the Brew this deponent
master sett sayle at the Elve in Company of the shipps hereafter mentioned
to say, the Mercury John Detry master the Hope Hendrick Martins master, the ffortune
Bernard Vandunck master the Carpfanger Barent Jacobson Carpfanger master the
Prophet Elias Simon Cornelison Prophet master. the King David Jacob Young Master
the Saint Matthias Claes Billiet Master. the King David Witte Wittenson Master. the Saint
Anthony Zacharias Mielde master. the fflower Boye Peters master. the ffortune of
Hamburgh Heans Clauson master. the Hope John Peterson master. the ffortune Jochim
Dowke master. the fortune of Stralsondt. the Hope of Lubeck Hendrick Gove Master
the Gideon Gerds ffalkers master, And saith the sayd shipps sett sayle without any
Convoy or Men of Warr, and were bound for france for wynes most of them
for Nantes and this deponents shipp amongst the rest, and some for Rochell.
And saith that in their Course for ffrance in the North Sea betwixt the Texall
and the Maze about three dayes before the sayd ffleet was seized the tyme
he otherwise remembreth not, the Hope of Dantzick Martin [?Man] master. the
Starr of Embden Peter Eggen master. the Salvador of Lubeck Hendrick Danner master
ioyned themselves with the sayd ffleet, and being as it seemeth bound for
france sayled along in Company with them. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the second and third he saith that upon Sunday morning the 2d of October and not
before he this deponent and others of the sayd ffleet discovered farr in the reare
of the sayd ffleet 2 shipps which afterwards appeared to be men of warr which
all that day stood the same course with the ffleet but att such a sistance that
it could not be discovered what they were, and that in the fateronnone of the
same day two private English men pf warr fell into the sayd ffleet to one
of whom this deponent gave a Cheese, and the sayd shipps in the
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.212v Annotate
reare seemed to make upp towards the sayd 2 Englishmen one whereof [?fXXX]
twoards Dover and the other towards ffrance. And further cannot

To the 4. 5. and 6 articles of the sayd alleagtion This deponent saith and deposeth
that upon the night of the Sunday the wind being westerly and contrary the
sayd ffleet made little way so as by the Munday morning the foresayd shipps
in the reare were come up with the ffleet and being as the sayd ffleet were
forced to tack to and fro to make their Course, were sometymes to the  [?XXX ?gage]
and sometymes on the wether gage of the sayd ffleet, And saith the sayd [?Munday]
morning there happened to be a small English frigot in the sayd ffleet, which
the sayd e shipps perused, till such tyme as the shipp Elizabeth came in
sight which was in the forenoone of the sayd Monday. And saith that the wind
was then still and that which blew was westerly and contrary so as the sayd
ffleet was forced to tack to and fro crosse and crosse the Channell to [?make]
their Course, and saith the sayd 2 shipps putting out the Hollands Colour [?moved]
toward the Elizabeth which from the Westward before the wind, and [?XXXX]
with her exchanged broad sides with her. And saith that when the sayd ffight
happened and before, the sayd ffleet had out their own colours videlicet the
Hamburghers Hamburgher Colours, the Lubeckers Lubeck colours and the rest the
colours of their respective Countryes, howbeit the wind was so slack it would not
beare out the sayd colours, so as this deponent and others were forced with their
hands to stretch out their Colours that the Elizabeth might see them to be from
and saith that the sayd ffleet had not any thing to doe with the sayd [?XXX]
men of warr, nor did any wayes assist them nor were under their convoy nor
privy to their designe, but struck and willingly submitted themselves to the
Elizabeth, and sent their masters aboard who shewed their papers and [?XX]
the truth of their designe, all which notwithstanding the Captaine of the Elizabeth
frigott deteyned  the sayd ffleet, and hindred them in their designe and voyage
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 7 he saith he hath heard att Hamburgh and beleiveth that the arlate John Baptista
Youncker and Mrs Ann Greave were and are Partowners of the shipp [?XXX]
aforesayd and that they with others bought the same att Hamborough a little before
this voyage. And further cannot depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp the
Brewer this deponent master was and is of Hamburgh, and the Owner thereof was
and is one Hamburgher borne and there liveth, and was sett out bu him
upon this voyage to Nantes in ffrance for wine uppon the Accompt of [?him]
and to Hamburgh was to have returned with her ladeing and saith
noe dutchman or subiect of the States of the united Provinces had at the
beginning of the sayd voyage or now hath any interest or share in the said
shipp or any part thereof. And further he cannot depose saving that the
arlate shipp david witte witteson master, and Saint Anthony Zacharie [?MXXX] Master
belong to the Port of Hamburgh, and that it usuall for Hamburghers and
Lubeckers to buy shipps in Holland.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
Martin who hath laded some goods in the sayd shipp the Brewer was and is an
Inhabitant and Citizen of Hamburgh and there hath lived of this deponents
knowledge fifteene yeares, and was marryed there, and hath his howse and
family there, and was and is a subiect of the free State of Hamburgh
and so accounted. And this deponent Claes van Roten master of the [?Brewer]
doth not know or hath any other reason to conceyve the saud Jurgen [?XXX]
was borne in ffrance but onely becasue he speaketh good ffrench And
further he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.213r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. He saith he is Master of the sayd shipp the Brewer and so hath bene
ever since ffebruarie last, and came first aboard att Hamburgh and
was in her att the tyme of seizure.

To the .2. he saith that George Luyders is well knowne
to this deponent, who [?XX hee] hath served in his shipps 29 yeares, for 30 yeares
now past, during all which tyme he hath bene an Inhabitant of Hamburg
was and is the sole owner seven eighth part of the sayd shipp the Brewer, and for the sayd
30 yeares hath bene and is a subiect of the free State of Hamburgh and
so accounted, and is an Easterling by birth and so accounted, and this
deponent is borne neere Hamburgh and a subiect of the free State thereof is owner of one eighth part thereof

To the 3. he saith he hath knowne his owne shipp the Brewer from february
last and saith the same was about the end of January last bought at Sardam
in Holland for four thousand and odd guilders, on behalfe of the sayd
Luyders and this Rendent by a Broker, which moneyes was by this Rendent
and sayd Luyders payd by bills of exchange, videlicet this Rendent
payd 500 and odd guilders to the sayd Luyders
att Hamburgh about february last for the sayd 1/8th part of the sayd
shipp. and this deponent saw the sayd Luyders pay the same and residue
of the sayd moneyes for his 7/8 part to a merchant of Hamburgh
according to a Bill of Exchange drawne upon him from Sardam, for
the sayd shipp. and saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp Mercury 3. monethes
the Hope Hendrick Martins Master .5 yeares. the fortune Bernard Van dunke
about 4 or 5 yeares. the Carpfanger 3 monethes the Prophet Elias about 6 yeares
the King david Jacob Young Master about 10 yeares. the Saint Matthias .3 monethes
the King david Witte Wittesom master, and Saint Anthony Zach. Mield Master .3 monethes the
fflora 3 monethes. the fortune Hans Clauson Master about 10 yeares. the Hope John Peterson master about
8 monethes. the fortune Joachim Dowke Master . the fortune of Stralsondt, the Hope of
Lubeck the Hope of Dantzyck about 3 monethes the Salvador, the Starr of Embden and
Gideon 1 moneth respectively

To the 4 he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .5. he saith there is laden aboard the sayd ship Brewer 7 packes
of flax and 2 packes of Russia hides and saith the same were laden by
the sayd Jacques Martin  in whose house att Hamburgh this REndent
saw the sayd goods before they were laden And further cannot depose [#]

[#] [LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]
saving that he this Rendent hath aboard the sayd shipp for
his owne Account 100 deales which he bought att Hamburgh of
Henry Stubbes for 24 Ryx dollars which he payd to him
about 3 monethes agoe in Hamburgh./ klaus van Reton [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

To the 6. he saith he was borne in a village neere to Hamburgh and was
and is an Inhabitant of Hamburgh and so hath bene with his wife and
family for 32 yeares or thereabouts, and hath 1/8 part in the sayd shipp
and the foresayd deales which he hopes will be restored

To the 7. 8. 9 an 10. Interrogatories he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 11. he saith all the papers belonging to this deponents shipp came to
the hands of Captaine Mings and so did the papers of the rest of the sayd shipps
as he beleiveth and further cannot depose

To the 12, he saith he cannot depose.

To the .13. he saith the sayd shipp Brewer arrived att Hamburgh from
Greeneland in August last. and otherwise saving his foregoing deposition s
he cannot depose.

To the 14. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 15. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 16. he saith he hath bene Master of the Brewer since [?John ?XXX]
and was appoynted Master by George Luyders aforesayd and toke first Charge
thereof att Hamborough and hath knowne the respective persons masters
of the respective shipps as followeth videlicet John Detry of the [?MXXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.213v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 8th of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Touching the perishablensse of the Lemmons)
and oranges aboard the shipp the Saint Peter)
Daniel Straetman master lying at dover and)
brought in thither by [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT])

Robert Rickman of Bartholomews Billingsgate London fishmonger
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts, and
James Calmady of Saint Mary [?At ?hills]
London draper aged 30 yeares or thereabouts
sworne in Court before the Judges [?the]
day aforesaid say and depose by vertue
of their oathes.

[ADD DATA]
----
[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.214r Annotate
the nynth of November 1653.

On the behalfe of [?Reyndorp] and)
company owners of the ffliboate)
Hope of hamborough.)

Rp.

Harman Williams of Hamborough Mariner, Master of the
ffliboate the hope of Hamburg, aged five and thirtie yeares or
thereabouts sworne in the High Court of the Admiraltie of
England and examined upon certaine Interrogatories therein
ministred on the behalfe of Jeremiah Reynsdorp, Albrety
Schults and company of Hamburgh, saith and deposeth
thereupon by vertue of his oath

That hee this deponent is master of the said ffliboate the hope of
hamborough and saith that Jerome Reyndorp, Albert Schult, and
hee this deponent all hamburghers were and are the true and sole owners of
her, and that about foure monethes since they bought her of a Stralsunder
at hamburgh, and that shee cost foure thousand markes the first
penny besides fitting and furnishing. And saith that shee came from
hamborough about five weekes since in the cloth fleete bound for this port,
and that shee brought hemp, iron, steele, packs of linnen and potashes and
delivered them here, And nowe shee is bound for Rochell or Bordeaux for
wines and other goods wherewith shee is to retourne for hamborough for accompt of her said owners
and of one hendrick Johnson Ruyck a Burgher of hamborough. All which
hee knoweth because hee is master of her as aforesaid.

harman Williamson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 9th day of November 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Henry Suerbock Matthias)
[?Simonds] and Companie for the shipp the)
Golden Sunn whereof Hendrick Pant)
was and is Master) taken and surprized by)
the shipp Sampson whereof Robert Granger)
was Captaine. Smith ffranklyn)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Henry Snerbock.

1

Jan Harmanson Snack of Breme
Mariner aged 49 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth
that the arlate shipp the Golden Sunn Hendrick Pant Master hath
bene well knowne to this deponent being an Inhabitant of Breme
from the first building threof, which he saith was about eight yeares
now past done att Breme aforesayd of the certayn knowledge and sight
of this deponent by and att the Costs of the said Suerbeke and Company
Owners thereof, and for a shipp so built the sayd golden
Sun for all the tyme aforesayd was and is commonly accounted
reputed and taken. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the monethes
June July August September and October 1653. and for severall yeares
before, the arlate Henry Suerbeck, Matthias Symonds William Habakin
Hendrick Meyer John Cuyper, Arent van Buren, Harman Jacobs
and Hendrick Pant were and att present are the Lawfull Owners of
the sayd shipp the Golden Sunn and her tackle and furniture and so accounted
which he knoweth for that they built the same att their owne charge and for
their owne use att Breme as aforesayd. And the sayd persons were and are 
and every of them was and is an Inhabitant and Burgher of Breme and
a subiect of the free State thereof and so accounted, which he knoweth being
himselfe a Burgher of Breme, and otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.214v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The fifteenth of November 1653.

On the behalfe of the State)
touching the perished condition oof the)
wheate aboard the ffortune of Stettin)

Rowe dt.

Robert Brathwaite of Southwarke aged 48 yeares or thereabouts
and John Nutsher of the same place aged 55 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne in Court before the right worshipfull William
Clarke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes and
George Cock Esquire Judges of the high Court of the
Admiraltie, say and depose by vertue of their oathes.

That they theise deponents being thereto imployed by the Commissioners for
prize goods wrought aboard the shipp the ffortune of Stettin then lying neare
limehouse dock laden with wheate and other goods, in lightening the said
shipp of the said goods, And this deponent Richard Brathwaite who wrought
from the beginning to the ending of the said worke of delivery of the said goods
deposeth that the said wheate was excessively hot and baked hard
with longe lying that after they had taken off about two foote of the wheate
the rest was soe hard that they were forced to loosen it with iron crowes
and such like instruments, and that the heate thereof was soe greate that
they could not endure their clothes on but were faine to worke
naked, and further that it had taken in wet at the ballast [?port]
and by meanes thereof was become soe noysome and full of stench
that they could very hardly endure to worke upon it, and that
through the said heate and stench the said persons that wrought there
became sick and one of them named Edward Spri[?ppe] is since dead thereof
and this deponent Robert Brathwaite is still ill thereof. And at the
bottome upon the matts, hee saith that the same with heate was  [?XX]
and much other of the said wheate
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.215r Annotate
before the finishing of the said worke, and well knoweth that the said [?XXXX]
was [?XXXX] [?XXXX] and perished as aforesaid, and by reason of the said
heate and stench hee ws faine to goe with and could not [?XXX] to worke
[?XXX] and thereof, being ill and out of temper therewith. And they
ioyntly affirme and depose that they are accustomed to worke in corne aboard
shipps and otherwise and thereby are well acquainted with the condition pof
that commoditie, and alsoe well knoweth thereby that in case the said corne
had laine three weekes longer aboard, the best of it would have bin
soe perished and [?XXXX] that it would have bin nothing worth, nor not to give
unto hoggs, and if it had laine a moneth longer they beleeve it would
have taken fire through its owne heate, and have fired it selfe
and the said shipp.

Robert [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
John [?XXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The sixteenth day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Blaes de La Pyna)
for his goods in the Salvador et cetera

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Antonio de Ponte of Teneriffa merchant
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth saith as followeth

To the first and the rest of the Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith That the arlate Blaes de La Pena, a merchant of Sevill who
this deponent hath knowne well for 7 or 8 yeares now past in the monethes
of September October and November 1652 was and now is the lawfull
Owner of the arlate eleven baggs of wooll marked as in the margent
four whereof were and are washed woolls and seven of them foule
Lambs woolls unwasht, and that about the latter end of September
or beginning of October he the producent caused the same to be
laden att Cadiz aboard the sayd shipp Salvador Christian Cloppenbergh
Master for his owne accompt to be transported to Ostend and there delivered
to his Agents for his use, the reason of this deponents knowledge
of and in the premisses was and is that he being att Sevill in the
sayd month of September then and there saw the sayd baggs of
wooll in the ware howse of the producent there, and heard him
say they were his owne goods and that he would send them to
Ostend aboard the sayd Christian Cloppenbergh and accordingly
this deponent saw the same embarked att Sevill to be carryed
downe and laden att Cadiz aboard the sayd shipp, And this
deponent afterwards saw two bills of lading for the same
both of one tenor in Sevill in the hands of the producent
firmed with the handwriting of the sayd Christian Cloppenbergh
with whose character this deponent is well acquainted. And hee
further saith that the bill of lading to the allegation annexed and
now shewne him is one of those bills of lading which he so saw
for the sayd woolls in Sevill in the hands of the producent, and
the contents thereof were and are true. And saith the sayd shipp
at her
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.216v Annotate
19th November 1653.

Affidavit touching the)
Mary and John.)

Captaine ffrancis hardidge of London Mariner aged 50 yeares or thereabouts
sworne before the right Worshipfull William Clerke and John
Godolphin doctors of Lawes - Judges of the high Court
of Admiraltie saith and deposeth as followeth

That the shipp the Marie and John whereof this deponent was Commander
was seized and taken away from this deponent by the Kinge of Portu=
galls Officers in the moneth of ffebruary 1651 old style at the [?XXXXX]
and after such takeing away shee was surprized by the Hollanders
upon the Portugeses for a Portugall Shipp and carrued into [?ffernam]
buck in the sayd Brazeele and there made prize of although this deponent
did there sue for the sayd shipp where hee paid and disbursed in lawe suites
in endeavouring to recover the sayd shipp the summe of 332 guilders
which maje in sterlinge money thirty three pounds fower shillings
and this deponent did pay and disburse for his dyett and lodgeing and
other chareges there the summe of 1444 Guilders

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.217v Annotate
The 22th of November [?1653]

The keepers of the libertie of England by)
authoritie of Parliament, against the shipp the)
Liesde alias the Love, Goodman Lawson master)

Examined upon the Interrogatories ministred
on the behalfe of the State

Rowe dt.

Hance Johnson of Copenhaven Mariner
aged 46 yeares or thereabouts sworne [?in ?this]
Court as by the acts thereof, saith
and deposeth as followeth, videlicet

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee belonged to and was one of the company
of the said shipp the Liesde at the time of her seizure, namely
boatswaine of her, and hath served about foure yeeres in her and came
first aboard her at Copenhaven.

To the second hee saith there are sixteene owners or thereabouts of the
said shipp and that they live all in Copenhaven and were and are subiects
of the kinge of denmarke, and that hee remembreth the [?XXXXX] of
some of them, namely Nicholas Jastman, hance Juwolson, Hurian [?RXX]
and the said mastyer Goodman Lawson, and that the said Justman hath an
eighth part in the said shipp. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith that the said Nicholas Jastman caused the said shipp to
be built at Copenhaven about 6 yeeres since at his owne chardges, and
since hee hath taken in the said other partneres, And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the 4th hee saith the said Goodman Lawson hath bin master of the said
shipp about five yeeres, and that a lubecker named Walber [?Bornhelt]
was master next before him, And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving
the said Lawson tooke chardge of her at Copenhaven aforesaid, upon
his first comming to be master of her about 5 yeeres since.

To the 5th 6th 7 and 8th hee saith the said shipp proceeded from Copenhaven
about a weeke after Midsommer last and went for Island and
there tooke in her lading of stockfish and a little traine oile, and
was nowe returneing there with for Copenhaven when shee was seized.
And saith that the said fish and oile being about 140 lasts of fish, and about 5 lasts of
traine oile, were provided and laden by hendrick Johnson a [?sopracargo]
or merchant who went alonge with them in the said shipp, and that  the
said goods were ldaen for the accompt of the Island Company of
Copenhaven, for when the said vessell was freighted by the said hendrick
Johnson, and that the said company were and are Inhabitants merchants
and others of Copenhaven, subiects of the kinge of denmarke, and
that the said fish and oile were bought upon truck for beere, brandywine
meale, linnen and woollen cloth and bread carried to Island
in the said vessell for the said companies accompt, And that the said hendrick
Johnson was and is alsoe a subiect of the said kinge and a merchant
dwelling in Copenhaven, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee saith hee this deponent was borne at Masterland [?XXX]
and hath dwelt about tenn yeares at Copenhaven, And saith hee had
1000 fish aboard for his owne accompt, which hee hopeth to have restored
And otherwise negatively.

To the 10th 11th, 12th 13 and 14 hee referreth himselfe to his
foregoeing deposition, and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 15th hee saith that the Company of the man of warr that made
the seizure tooke away and embeazeld out of and from the said shipp the
Liesde of the said goods that were in her hould eleaven barrells of [?traine ?oile]
and some fish, and all the fish betwixt decks being about 20 lasts
together with two cable towes and a [?purline],
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 16 and 17th hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 18th hee saith the said shipps company consisted of 12 eaters
all of Copenhaven aforesaid, and that the said master was borne at
[?Xrewne] in denmarke, and otherwise hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid
[?XXXX]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.218r Annotate
To the 19th hee saith the said shipp was to dischardge at Copenhaven aforesaid.

To the 20th hee cannot depose.

To the 21th hee answereth negatively.

To the 22th hee saith there was noe other master but the sayd lawson.

The marke of

'HIS' hance Johnson [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid Interrogatories.

2

Laurence Albertson of Elsanore Mariner, aged 30 yeares
or thereabouts, sworne and examined

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith that hee was shipped aboard the said shipp
at Copenhaven about three dayes after Whitsuntide last to goe the voyage
in question, and ever since hee hath served in her as one of her fore mast men
and was aboard at the time of her seizure.

To the rest of the Interrogatories hee saith that the said shipp laden with meale,
bread, beere, linnen cloth and other goods proper for the Island voyage, departed
from Copenhagen on or about the 30th of June last bound for Island to lade
fish for the service and accompt of the Island company of Copenhagen
burghers of that towne and subiects of the kinge of denmarke, and
accordingly went and tooke in her lading of Stockfish and about foure
or five lasts of traine oile at Island in the moneth of August last,
and retourned thence with the same for Copenhagen for
the accompt of the aid Island company, and comming under Jutland
in their homewards course the said shipp and goods in the moneth of October
last were seized by the Catherin frigot, and saith the said shipp was
to dischardge at Copenhagen aforesaid, and saith that the owners of the
said shipp as hee hath heard dwell in Copenhagen, one whereof named
Nicholas hee well knoweth, And that the said owners were and are
all accompted Burghers of Copenhaven and subiects of the said
kinge of denmarke, and that this deponent is alsoe one of his subiects,
as likewise the master of the said shipp Godman Lawson, and the
sopra cargo hendrick johnson who went alonge and laded the said fish
and ole., And saith the  said takers have taken all the fish that was
betwixt decks, and much of the shipps furniture, All which
hee knoweth being one of the said shipps company and going the
said voyage and seeing the said seizure soe made

[?XXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 22th of November 1653:-

On the behalfe of James)
[?Johnson] touching the)
Sarah)

Rp.

James ffordham of London Mariner aged 40 yeares or
thereabouts, master of the good shipp the Sarah of London
Cobham Doves of Dover Mariner aged 44 yeares or
thereabouts, and John Quin of Dover Mariner aged 36
yeares or thereabouts, sworne before the right Worshipfull William
Clarke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes and Charles
George Cock Esquire Judges of the High Court of Admiraltie
say and deposeth by vertue of their oathes as followeth.

And first the said James ffordham and Cobam doves doe say and depose
that about 6 weekes since the said shipp the Sarah departed from Roane in ffrance laden
with diverse goods for this port of London, and that after shee had bin
about five dayes at sea comming off [?Binchington] shee was overtaken
by a greate storme and stresse of weather which continued the space of
five or sixe dayes, and the said shipp having gained Margaret Roade
was
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.218v Annotate
was by the force and fury of the said storme put back into the downes, and
thence into dover Roade, and thence shee was constrained for the safeguarding
of shipp and goods to make and get into dover peere; and that in and
by meanes of the said tempest and storme the sea beate often over the said
shipp and the said vessell shipped much water, whereby it is possible
her goods may be damnified, which they depose this deponent James
ffordham being master and this deponent Colham doves being masters
mate of the said shipp, and seeing all the premisses soe happening; And
they further say that if any such dammidge [?behappened], the same was
occasioned meerly bu the said storme and tempest, and not by
neglect in the said master and company, or fault of the said shipp. And
this deponent John Quin deposeth that about tenn dayes since and
after her said being forced into dover peere hee there came aboard
her, to pilot her up for this port, and found her to bestaunch
tight and sufficient both above and under water, and soe she
continueth to this present, this deponent this day trying the
[?poumpe] and finding her to be soe staunch and tight, and that shee
continued tight and staunch in her comming to this port from dover,
and therefore hee beleeveth that if any dammadge had befallen
the lading aboard her, it ws by the said storme which happened
about six weekes sicne and forced her into dover, which storme
was soe exceeding greate and violent that a shipp was thereby
cast away in the downes, and another forced thense that hath
since bin heard of and much other dammadge done to shipping

And lastly they the said James ffordham
and Cobham Doves doe depose, that the
chardges for the preservaccon of the
said shipp and lading the said voyage
were as followeth, videlicet paid for
pilots and other chardges out of the River of Roane for securing her and
lading from ne of warr then in the said river, fowre pounds sterling
Alsoe for getting the said shipp into dover peere twenty shillings

James fordham [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Cobham Doves [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 23th of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Phillips and company against the)
Saint Peter, Daniel Straetman Master)

Examined upon an allegation in the acts and
schedules on the behalfe of duarte
Nunez da Costa.

[?XXXX])
dt.

1

Hendrick Straetman of Hamborough Mariner
stiersman of the said shipp the Peter. aged 23 yeares
or thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the said allegation in the acts of Court and to the three schedules
therein mentioned nowe showed unto him hee saith and deposeth
that upon the seizure of the said shipp the Peter and her lading
in or about the 28th of October last betwixt the Ile of Wight and
[?Beversey] by Captaine Harrington and companie, the master of the
said shipp the Peter Daniel Straetman was commannded by the said
man of warre to hoyst out his boate and come aboard the man of
warr, upon which commannd the said Daniel caused his boate to bee
hoysted out, and while the same was doing hee went to his
chest and tooke out his papers and bills of lading and of this deponents
sight and knowledge carried them in a [?net] and a tinn box with him
into the said boate and therewith went aboard the said man of warr
where hee was detained prisoner, for hee came not back againe aboard
his
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.219r Annotate
his owne shipp where this deponent remained. And saith that since his comming to
London, meeting with the said Daniel Straetman, the said Daniel among other
discourse told him that hee showed his papers to the said Captaine Harrington, and
that the said Captaine refused to keepe and returned unto him three of them being his
Charter partie and a certificate from Captaine Watts commannder of the
Hopewell, and another from the Madera's, and this deponent seeing the said
Charterpartie annexed, saith it is the same that was aboard, where this
deponent severall times sawe it, and saith the contents thereof and of the
other two schedules annexed (being nowe made knowne unto him) were and are
true and soe had and donne as therein is conteyned, which hee knoweth being
aboard and foing the whole voyage and seeing the same soe donne.
And hee beleeveth that all the said three papers were aboard the Peter at the
time of the said seizure, and were amongest the rest carried by the said
Daniel Straetman aboard the said man of warr. And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

[?hindrich] straetman [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges.
----
The 24th day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

1

Joachim Warner of Hamburgh Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Saint John Baptist
aged 43 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the .1. Interrogatorie This deponent saith he was in the sayd shipp the Saint
John Baptist att the tyme of the seizure interrate and was master of her
and so hath bene about two yeares and an halfe and was and is an Hamburgher
borne under the Jurisdiction of the free State of Hamburgh, and hath
lived there all his tyme and hath his wife Children howse and family
there att present. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .2. Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp att the tyme of her seizure was bound
to the port of Hamburgh, from whence she began her outward voyage
in the month of July last .1653. which was as he saith for the Accompt of
Hamburgh merchants to whom she was lett to fraight by Charter part[?ie]
videlicet Eggert Bussleman and others mentioned in the sayd Charter party
remaining in the Registry of this Court whereto he referreth himselfe
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth Interrogatory. this deponent saith the sayd shipp lay att Hamburgh
before she began her sayd outward voyage eleven or twelve monethes
or thereabouts, and the last voyage she made next before this was
from hamburgh to Malaga and back againe to Hamburgh with her
lading of wine and fruit for the Accompt of merchants Inhabitants
of Hamburgh and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth and sixth Interrogatories he saith
he this deponent by name Jochim Warner is Master of the sayd shipp and
was appoynted master of her att Hamburgh about 2 yeares and an
halfe now past by his Owners whose names are hereafter specifyed. and
the last Master before him this deponent was Peter Bock an Hamburgher
who was in his life tyme a Partowner of the sayd shipp but of how much
knoweth not, and he is since dead, and so dyed about three yeares agoe
[?And]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.219v Annotate
And saith that the present Owners of the sayd shipp are
Hieronimus Reynstorp the elder, and his son Hieronimus Reynstorp who are owners of [?3/8th]
and David [?Brandt]
who is owner of 1/16th part, and Abraham Eylars who is an owner of one
sixteenth part, and Lupen Nunez who is owner of 1/8th
and this deponent who was and is owner of 3/8th parts of
the sayd shipp; And saith that he this deponent bought his sayd
three eighth parts of the sayd shipp att Hamburgh about 2 yeares
and an halfe now past of the sayd Reynstorps and the widow of
the sayd Peter Bock for six thousand and odd markes [?Lubeck]
which money this deponent paid about the same tyme att Hamburgh
to the widow and Reynstorps aforesayd:- And saith the sayd david
Brandt, Abraham Eylars and Lupen Nunez did the tyme and place
aforesayd buy their sayd respective shares, by this deponent of and from
the sayd widdow and sayd Reynstorps, and the whole shipp being
valued att about 3000. Ryx dollars the sayd Brandt Eylars and Nunez kept
their respective shares thereof proportionable to their respective [?XXX]
in the sayd shipp to him this deponent who payd the same over to the sayd
widdow and Reynstorps aforesayd att Hamburgh but how much in certaine the said [?money
so by them severally paid was it be [?near] now about 2 yeares and an halfe since it was paid
he cannot att present calll to mynd. And saith the sayd Reynstorp the elder
and his said sonn and the sayd Bock were the Originall Owners of the shipp and [?XXXXX]
as he hath heard att Lubeck where the sayd shipp was built but this
deponent saw not them pay any money for the same;
And saith the foresayd persons [?and]
Owners are all Hamburghers borne att Hamburgh and there have
lived all their tymes and there have all of them att this present their
wives Children howses and familyes, and the sayd Reynstorp
the elder is one of the principall men or Aldermen of Hamburgh and
further cannot depose.

To the seventh Interrogatory This deponent saith he hath lived att Hamburgh
all his tyme. and knoweth that the sayd Eggart Bussellman [?is]
the owner of a great part of the present Cargazon videlicet. about [?fiftie]
lasts of wyne and fruit aswell by the bill of lading for the [?same]
as by the relation of the foresayd Maurice Helmars the sayd
Bussellmans wifes brother, to whom this deponent delivered a
Cargazon of the foresayd peice goods of good value for accompt of the sayd [?Busselman] and
the respective factor that did lade the other goods now aboard the
shipp did att the tyme of lading the same expressely declare and
acquaint this deponent that the goods by them respectively laden
were for the Accompt of the respective persons Inhabitants of
Hamburgh and knowne to this deponent, for whose reckoning and
risgo the same are entred in the respective bills of lading for
the same. And othewise referring himselfe to his foresayd bills of
lading which are as he beleiveth in the Registry of this Court he
saith he cannot depose.

To the eighth Interrogatory he saith there is aboard his sayd shipp about [?35]
or 36. persons of his sayd shipps Company and four Passengers. and
the sayd persons are Easterlings and not any of them a subiect of the
States of the United Provinces, and his sayd shipps Company came
all first aboard att Hamburgh, and one of the sayd Passengers
named Jurian Moller came likewise aboard att Hamburgh [?XXXX]
as this deponent taketh it some small [?parcells] of goods in the outward voyage and
some small quantity of goods now likewise aboard as by the [?XXX]
lading for the same to which he referrs himself [?may appeare ?and]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.220r Annotate
the other three Passengers came first aboard att Malaga and have some
small parcells of goods aboard. but saith there was not nor is not any
Merchant aboard in the quality of a Supracargo. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the nynth Interrogatory he saith that for all the merchants goods aboard the
sayd shipp there were and are bills of lading. but saith this deponent hath
a Cargazon of goods aboard laden by himselfe and for his owne accompt for
which there is  no bill of lading that is to say about fifty pipes of
wyne and about forty barrills of raisings, and his shipps Company have
about twenty or thirty pipes of wine and a quantity of raisins for
their Accompt for which there is noe bill of lading. And otherwise he
saith he cannot depose.

To the tenth Interrogatory this deponent saith he knoweth the factors interrate
that did lade the sayd goods att Malaga and hath knowne some of them
twenty yeares and all of them ten yeares, and saith they are all
Easterlings borne, and soe accounted and none of them was borne that ever this deponent
heard in Holland Zealand or West ffreizland, and saith that att
Hamburgh in common speech the subiects of the States of the United Provinces
are called by the name of Hollanders not by the name of Dutch. and
by his name or word Dutchmen in common speech is meant intended and
understood att Hamburgh High Germans and Easterlings that is to say
the Subiects of the States of Hamburgh, Lubeck Bremen and other Imperiall
Cittyes townes principalities and places, and accordingly this deponent
did meane and intend by the said word Dutchmen in his depositions taken att
Plymouth according to the mode of his owne Country speech, and did not
meane or intend thereby the subiects of the States of the United
Provinces. And further cannot depose.

Jochim Warner [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges)
----
The 28th of November 1653.

Phillips sor con the Peter praed)
Daniel Straetman master.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation and schedule.

dt.

2

Daniel Straetman of hamburgh Mariner
Master of the said shipp the Peter aged 37 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the said allegation in the acts of Court and three schedules annexed
nowe showne unto him, hee saith and deposeth that the said three
schedules were on board the said shipp the Saint Peter at the time of her
seizure by Captaine Harrington allegate and companie, and this deponent
being commannded by the said man of warr to hoyste out his boate and come
aboard him, this deponent obeyed and caused his boate to be hoysted out
and this deponent went in the same aboard the said man of warr to
the said Vaptaine Harrington and carried all his papers aboard with
him and amongest them the said three papers annexed and showed them
to the said Captaine Harrington, the said three papers annexed and his
seabrief being in a tinnebox and his letters, bills , and other writings in
a net, and the said Captaine tooke them and went into his cabbin with
them where with hee and his doctor and others of his company
viewed and perused them and after they had soe perused them (which [?particular]
lasted neare an howers space or therebouts) the said Captaine returned
them
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.220v Annotate
them all againe to this deponent, who willing to preserve the said three papers
from taking  wet, put them into his pocket, and his seabrief againe in
the tinne box, and his other papers, bills and letters into his net as
formerly, and gave them to one of his boyes in
his boate, which boate the said Captaines company carried aboard an [?Emden]
named the yonge boare and fetched two hogsheads of wine thence aboard the
said man of warr, and when the said boate was returned
aboard the said man of warr, this deponents said boy to whom hee had
given the said papers and writings called to this deponent and stayed
aboard the said man of warr and told him that the writings would be [?XX]
wet by dashing of the sea over into the boate whereupon this
deponent tooke them from him into the said man of warr, and
asked the said Captaine where they should be disposed to keepe them from [?wet]
and the said Captaine willed him to lay them in his the said Captaines
cabbin, which hee this deponent did, and ten the said Captaine [?afterwards]
tooke and laid or caused them to be laid up, only the said three papers 
annexed being in this deponents pocket hee kept the same in his
custodie, not being demannded by the said Captaine, who well kneweth
the contents thereof, for upon the said perusall, the said Captaine
said in this deponents presence and hearing, well what shall ever doe
I see that this is a free man or to that effect; and therewithall
speaking to this deponent, said to this or the like efect, well [?XX]
I sea you are free, neverthlesse if I let you goe, my company
will pretend that you might have bin prize and soe fall out with [?mee]
and therefore you must to dover, where having spoken with mr delabar
you shall be suffered to passe freely away, and soe they carried this
deponent and his said shipp to dover the 29th of October last
having taken him betwixt the Ile of Wight and [?Beversey] the day
before. And further hee saith that the said three papers and
every of them were and are true and reall and the contents thereof
true and soe had and donne as therein is contained, and this  [?XXX]
high dutch paper was and is the true Charter partie for the voyage
in question of the said shipp, and this deponent lost all his said
other papers and writings (saving the said three annexed) in the
custodie of the said Captaine who sent them
ashore at dover by his Purser, sine which time this deponent hath
not seene them.

[?VXXXX XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three Judges.
----
The 7th of December 1653.

The claime of Egbert Eneus, Ever Garris)
John Labogoose and others of Embden for)
the shipp the Liesde of Embden henry)
Johnson master, taken by Captaine holman in)
the Lime twigg)

Examined upon the allegation
on the behalfe of the said allegation

1

Hendrick Johnson of Embden Mariner
master of the said shipp aged 54 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined

[?XXXX]

To the first second and third articles hee saith and deposeth that hee this
deponent is master of the said shipp the Liesde and hath soe bin for [?XXX]
nine yeares last past during all which space shee hath as hee saith belonged
to the port of Emden, and hath from time to time sailed out and [?XXX]
that port in severall voyages and still hath ended the said voyages [?there]
and from time to time shee hath for all the said space bin [?XXXXXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.221r Annotate
[?reXXXed] and furnished by and at the chardges of her owners Egbert Ewers, Ever
Gorris and others of Embden, who have for all the said time bin owners of
and in quiet and peaceable possession of the said shipp tackle and furniture
and for such commonly accompted, All which hee knoweth being master of her as
aforesaid: And saith that in or about the end of Aprill last the said shipp
was sett out from Embden by the said Egbert Ewers and company all of
Embden, her said owners, to goe to Norway and lade deales and carry
the same to this port of London in case shee could goe thither and were not
hindred by the hollanders, otherwise to goe for ffrance and deliver and
sell the same for the accompt of the said owners and lade salt and bringe
the same for Embden for the same accompt, And saith that hee this deponent
accordingly went wuth the said shipp to Norway and laded deales, and
departed thence therewith for London where hee was to deliver the same to
one Mr [?XXXX] of Wapping dock, whose servant was at Embden and agreed
with this deponent and owners for the price thereof and for delivery of the same
to his said master in case hee this deponent was not hindred by the hollanders,
and this deponent in his course was met and brought with his said shipp
and lading in or about June last to dover by one of the Parliaments shipps
and being there cleared, this deponent came and made the said delivery
to the said Mr Knipe and received his money for his owners for the same
according to agreement made with the said Mr Kinges servant, And after the
said delivery or during the same, there came letters from the said Egbert
Evers written in behalfe of himselfe and company of owners aforesaid to their
correspondent here in London and [?came] [?inclosed] to this deponent advising that whereas they had intended
and directed this deponent to goe for ffrance and lade salt for Embden
they had nowe thought good to order this deponent for the East countrey, and
therefore thi deponent should goe thither therewith, and that hee
this deponent should goe
to Rochell, for his said
lading of salt, which letters the said correspondent (a merchant of this citie)
imparted to this deponent being sicke and ordered him for Rochell
accordingly, whither this deponent accordingly weny and tooke in his
lading of salt for the East countrey and from Barent van Moppen who laded the
same for the said owners accompt and saith it is usuall and
frequent where there are severall owners and partners for one alone
to write the letters and addresses and for the factor to [?rewrite] and make
the consignement to him, to avoide the trouble and [?prolixetie] of many names in letters.
And that comeing neere the Messe hee was taken by Captaine Holman
and brought to Dover, and that the salt seized by him was and is the very
same salt soe laden by the said Barent van Mappen adn this deponent
hath made noe other voyage since his departure from London. And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith that his shipp us owned in 28 parts, and this deponent
hath a 14th part therein and about 3 lasts or thereabouts of the said salt
are belonging unto him, the restitution of which shipp and lading hee saith
is due to the said owners being friends of this Commonwealth, and
therefore hee cannot [?XXX] it a benefit, howbeit the sooner the said
restitution is afforded the better it will be for the owners in regard of the
chardge the said shipp [?XX] at.

To the second hee saith that the said correspondence read to this deponent the said letters
soe came from Embden from the said Egbert Evers, and this deponent
being sick did not reade them himselfe, And otherwise hee cannot
answere saving as aforesaid.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.221v Annotate
To the third hee saith hee beleeveth in his conscience hee knoweth
that the said shipp and lading doe really and truely belonge to Embdeners
Inhabitants there and subiects of that free State and to noe
other person or persons whatsoever.

To the 4 hee saith the said Barent vom Meppen bought and paid for the
said salt, and this deponent did not see the paying for the same, nor knoweth
howe much was paid, but heard the said barent say that hee had [?XXXX]
drawne the same to be repaid by Egbert Evers by bill of Exchange

To the last hee saith hee doth not knowe nor beleeve that there
is any merchant or merchants whatsoever of Holland or Zealand or other
plcae of the United Netherlands come to live at Embden since the
troubles interrogated, or have their factors there, And otherwise negatively
to all./

hind[?XX] Janson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctors Clerke and Godolphin.
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

Rp.

2.

Harman Headicke of Embden Mariner master of the
shipp the yonge Bore aged 33  yeeres or therabouts sworne
and examined.

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee hath well knowne the shipp the Liesde arlate for these
eight or nine yeares last past during wll which time shee hath belonged
to the port of Emmbden, and hath bin from time to time sett forth
from thence under the conduct of Hendrick Johnson her nowe master
whoe hath bin master of her for all the said time, and that at 
Embden shee hath bin from time to time fitted furnished and
repaired during all te said time and hath sailed out from [?XXX]
in to that port at the place whereunto shee belongs, and
that Egbert Evers, E[?wer] Garris, John Labegoose and others [?of]
Embden were and are commonly accompted her owners, and as owners
they have from time to time set and fitterd her out, and that they
were and are all Embdeners, and there dwelling and subiects of the
free state and for such commonly accompted, All which hee knoweth
being a master of a shipp of that port and having lived for all the
time aforesaid there and thereby came to take notice of the premisses
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interogatories

To the first hee saith hee cometh required by his precontest [?Harman]
Johnson the Skipper of the said shipp the Liesde to speake the truth
And otherwise negatively.

To the 2, 3 and 4th negatively, saving hee beleeveth the said shipp and
lading really belongs to Embdeners and Inhabitants of Embden and none others

To the 5th negatively, saying hee knoweth not of one Hollander or
Zeelander whatsoever or their factors come to dwell in Embden since the
troubles interrogated or deiffernce betwixt England and Holland.

harman hedecke [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

3

Peter Harmans of Embden Mariner, aged 34 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined

To the first and second articles of the said alleagtion hee saith and deposeth
that
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.222r Annotate
that hee this deponent is a burgher and Inhabitant of Embden and hath
dwelt there all his time and hath for theise fourteene yeares last bin a
Skipper of that port and thereby hee cometh well to knowe the shipp the
Liesde arlate and hendrick Johnson the master thereof, and that the said
shipp hath for theise nine yeeres past belonged to the port of Embden
and hath from time to time sailed in and out thither and thence as the
port which is her home port, under the conduct of the said hendrick
Janson her master who hath bin master of her for all the said time
And that by the meanes aforesaid hee well knoweth Egbert Evert, Ever
Garris, John Labegoose and the rest of her owners. who hee saith were
and are all Embdeners, dwellers in and subiects of that place, and
as owners have from time to time set the said shipp out and fitted
and furnished her, and for the true lawfull and sole owners thereof
they were and are commonly accompted and reputed of his this deponents
knowledge. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To ther first hee saith hee was spoke unto by his contest the said hendrick
Johnson to come and testifie the truth in this cause, And otherwise negatively.

To the 2. 3. 4 and 5 negatively, saving hee verily
beleeveth the said lading aswell as the shipp belong to Embdener.

[?XXXXXXXXXX] [?XXXXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

4

Peter Epping of Embden mariner, aged 46 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles hee saith that hee this deponent
hath well knowne the shipp the Liesde, alias the Love or Charitie
allate for theise nine yeares last or thereabouts during all which space
the arlate hendrick Johnson hath bin master of her, and Egbert [?Ewer]
[?Eyers] [?Gavris] John Labegoose and others to the number of 28 or therabouts
in all were and are her owners and have soe bin for all the aid time and
as owners have from time to tiem fitted and sett out on voyages
from the port of Embden whereunto shee belongeth and for owners
thereof they have for all the said time bin and are commonly accompted
which hee knoweth to be true because hee this deponent is a skipper
and a burgher of Embden and hath alwaies dwelt there, and for
six yeares together (ended about three yeares since) this deponent served
in and was one of the company of the said shipp, namely the first
foure of the said six yeares hee was Cooke and the other two stiersman
of her And further that the said owners were and are all of
Embden and dwellers in and subiects of that place and have bin
for all the time aforesaid in the quiet and peaceable possession of
the said shipp, which hee knoweth for the reasons aforesaid, And
otherwise ee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories

To the first hee saith hee was spoken to by the said hendrick johnson
to come and testifie in this cause, and otherwise negatively.

To the 2. 3. 4. and 5 negatively, saving hee beleeveth
none but Embdeners have any part or share in the lading aboard

The marke of Peter [MARKE] Epping [MARKE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.222v Annotate
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

Rp.

5

Christian Paul Santen of London Merchant
36 yeeres or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first second and third articles of the said allegation hee
sayeth and deposeth that hee hath well knowne the shipp the Liesde
arlate hendrick Johnson master for theise six yeares last or thereabouts
during which space and longer sgee hath bin and at present is commonly
accompted and reputed to belonge to the port of Embden, and that
Egbert Ewers and company all Embdeners were and are commonly
accompted her owners, and further that in the yeare 1647
this deponents brother in lawe Elias deuf living at Embden
freighted her for accompt of him and of this deponent to come
thence to this port with corne, which shee accordingly did under
the conduct of hendrick Johnson her then and nowe master, and
delivered the said lading of corne to this deponent and further that
in the moneth of June last the said Egbert Evers in name of
himselfe and the rest of her owners wrote unto this deponent that
in case the said hendrick Johnson with the said shipp should happen
to be brought up in England, this deponent should give him assistance
and receive the money for his freight, and then order the said
master being cleared hence to goe for Rochell and loade salt
for the accompt of the said Egbert Evers and company owners
of the said shipp and carry the same for the east countrey, and
accordingly the said shipp being taken by one of the shipps of
this Commonwealth, and restored by order of the Counsell
of State (her lading being as hee hath heard to be dellivered to English men of this
port) this deponent imparted to the said master thae
said order, and the said master went to ffrance to lade salt for the
accompt aforesaid, And this deponent  haveing received her freight
made it over to the said owners by bill of exchange. And
lastly saith that where there are many owners, it is usuall for
them to committ the matter of writing letters and orders about a shipp
to some one of them, and hee ususually writes and receives answers
thereabouts to avoide the trouble of many names and severall
addresses which would be confused. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith the master of the said shipp spake to him to
come and speake the truth in this businesse. and otherwise negatively

To the 2. 3 and 4 hee saith hee hath  the said letter
in his custody which hee received from the said Egbert Evers
and that the said Egbert writing of the said shipp and shipps did
desire this deponent to give him assistance if hee were brought
up hether and acquaint him with their order of his going for
ffrance foreasmuch as the Interrogatory demannded 

To the third hee saith hee verily beleeveth the said shipp and lading
belonge to the said merchants and owners of Emden, and to noe other
person, and otherwise negatively.

All repeated before Doctor
Clarke and Doctor Godolphin

Christian Paulus Santon [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.223r Annotate
The 16th of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Libertie of England by)
authoritie of Parliament against the silver laden)
aboard the shipp the Wheele of ffortune, Jacob)
Gevers, Captaine. Budd. ffrancklin.)

Examined upon an allegation given
in on the behalfe of John Bolaert and
others.

.1.

Jacob Gevers of Hamborough Mariner, Commander of
the said shipp the Wheele of ffortune aged 41 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation and to the schedule annexed and bills of lading
mentioned in the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that in or about the
moneth October last newe stile there were laden and put aboard the shipp the Wheele
of ffortune arlate in the port of Cadiz in the dominion of the King of Spaine
the severall and respective parcells and quantities of silver schedled to be thence transported and carried in the said shipp for Hamborough and there to be
delivered to the severall and respective persons hereafter following or their assignes
according to the said respective bills of lading, videlicet one greate barr of silver
weighing one hundred fiftie one markes and five ounces marked '''&amp;#42;''' consigned to
Samuel [?Requestowe] of Hamburgh for accompt of John Bollaert of Antwerp. Item to ffrancis Sloyer marchant of Hamborough
one barr No. 75 alloy 2326 weighing ninetie three markes and one ounce marjed 'F.'
Item to Albert Anquelman marchant of Hamburgh 16 barrs of silver weighing
together two hundred eightie foure markes, six ounces and a halfe marked 'Lo'
Item the same person tenn baggs each containning 500 [?pottacones] [?Peruish]
No.1 to 10 marked 'PCE' Item to Joachim van Campen sonne of Pardon van
Campen marchant of Hamborough three peeces of silver No.1. 2. 3 weighing
together one hundred and one markes three ounces and a halfe marked 'C.'
Item to the same person one bagge with five hundred peeces of eight marked 'V'
Item to Daniel Brandes and Jeronimo Snitger marchants of Hamborough [MARKE]
one barr of silver weighing one hundred fourtie one marjes two ounces marked [MARKE]
Item to Peter and Arnold Roland marchants of Hamborough one bagge
containing five hundred peeces of eight marked 'R.' Item to Adrian
Yoncker marchant of Hamborough two baggs containing two thousand
peeces of eight marked 'B.' Item to the same person one bagg conteyning
one hundred ninetie one peeces of eight and a halfe marked 'D.' Item
to Derrick Cordes merchant of Hamborough two baggs Bo: 5. 6
conteyning together seaven hundred and fiftie peeces of eight [?PeruXXXs] marked [MARKE]
Item to Manuel Texera marchant of Hamborough three baggs No. 1 .2 .3,
each containing two hundred peeces of eight, in all 600 peeces of eight
marked [MARKE]. Item to Abraham van [?Nuffel] merchant of Hamborough
one bagge contayning three hundred and fiftie peeces of eight No. 1. marked AL'
Which hee knoweth because hee this deponent was then commander of the
said shipp and received the said parcells of silver aboard and kept a small note
of the particulars thereof, which hee hath yet in his custodie, and signed
bills of lading for the same, namely three bills (all of one tenor) for
each of the said parcells, with his this deponents owne hand, and
hee did not signe any other bills or bill of lading of any other tennor
than the said three bills for each parcell all of one tennor as aforesaid,
and saith that the said bills of lading nowe showne unto him were and are
each of them one of the said bills soe signed by this deponent, and were and
are true and reall bills
[?XXXXX to the names of the laders which hee supposeth to be feigned [?XXXXXXX] meanes only assumed which hee [?XXXXXXX] for the
reasons
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.223v Annotate
reasons aforesaid, And saith further that hee well knoweth all the
foresaid persons of Hamborough, and knoweth them to be of that place and
there dwelling and for such commonly accompted and reputed, and otherwise
hee cannot depose.

Rowe dt.

To the crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith that hee this deponent hath not any share or part in
any of the foresaid silver mentioned in the said schedule.

To the second hee saith that hee had noe request, license or passe [?permitting]
for the lading of the said silver aboard the said shipp.

To the third hee saith that hee knoweth not William Johnson of [?MXXXX]
or Amstedam [?as] living there, nor knoweth hee any of that name being in
any part or place of thedominions of the States of the United Netherlands
nor any there is a native of the said States by that name.

To the forth hee saith hee knoweth not whether hee sawe any persons [?called by]
the names interrogated at Cadiz or not for hee saith hee doth not remember
that hee knoweth any persons that are of those names or any of them [?and
there, and beleeveth that those names are assumed by some that [?XXXX]
and were the reall laders, to keepe them selves from discovery and
by meanes of the hazard that they run there in lading of silver, [?XXX]
for the parcells of silver laden under those names. and the markes and
numbers hee refrreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and the said bills of
lading remayning in this Court.

To the 5th hee saith that as touching the said silver laden for Adrian Yoncker
hee this deponent heard at Cadiz that it was in retourne and the proceed
of a parcell of was brought thither in the shipp the Crowne Imperiall
hance Meynard Master. And otherwise hee cannot depose, for hee only
[?touched] and staid about a moneth at Cadiz in her retourne and [?came]
homeward from the service of the Republique of Venice, in which service
hee had bin with the said shipp the Wheele of ffortune from the
yeare 1645 till July last.

To the 6th hee saith that the said Manuell Texera about 9 yeares since
that this deponent went from hamburgh lived as hee remembreth [?within]
the [?drackwall] in hamburgh, and ffrancis Sloyer is a batchelour [?who]
as this deponent is informed liveth with his mother in Saint Catharines streete there, both which [?XXX]
this deponent well knoweth, but did not see either of them at Cadiz [?nor]
did either of them come thence in the said shipp, And otherwise referring
himselfe to the said bills in this Court and his foregoing deposition hee cannot
depose, but saith the said ffrancis hath a brother named daniel living at
Cadiz.

To the seaventh hee saith that hee this deponent was very vigilant and
circumspect not to receive any silver aboard without strict enquirie and
examination first had that the same was belonging to persons that were [?in ?amity]
with respect of this Commonwealth, and if there were any that he had
any suspition that it belonged to hollanders or other subiects of the
States of the United Netherlands, hee this deponent would not by any
meanes suffer it to come aboard, hee this deponent having before [?XX]
received warning and order from his owners and friends at hamburgh
to have a care not to receive any  but for free persons, and [?sent] [?his]
passe from the English agent for his protection in theise seas [?XXX]
hee tooke care not to receive any unfree goods aboard, of which hee this
deponent was watch full and industrious not to take in any [?such], and this
deponent receiving the said silver from trustie hands, and such as made [?XX]
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.224r Annotate
assurances and protestations that the same was for the same accompts mentioned in the
bills of lading, hee verily beleeveth the same to be really and truely for the accompts
mentioned in the said bills.

To the 8th and 9 hee saith that upon his signing the bills of lading hee kept one of each
(being those brought in the shipp which were never out of his custody till the same
were delivered at Plimouth) by him, and delivered the other two for each parcell to the persons
that brought them or procured the signing thereof, being  the persons that laded the said
silver for the most part, and the rest the servants or such as were imployed by
therest of the said laders to bringe the said bills to be signed, And otherwise saving
his foregoing deposition to which hee referreth himselfe hee cannot depose.

To the 10th and 11th hee saith hee was never at Cadiz or Saint Lucars in merchant imployment
before this voyage, nor did hee ever lade or bringe silver thence before this
present voyage, and otherwise referring himselfe as aforesaid hee cannot
depose.

To the 12th and last hee saith that for greate and considerable quantities of
silver hee beleeveth that it is against the lawes of Spaine and forbidden
as a Capitale crime to lade and export it from Spaine, but for
oettie quantities of small importance, hee beleeveth that the same is not
soe looked after, nor the persons lading it liable to any greate danger, and
otherwise hee cannot depose, not being acquainted with the customes and
practises of Spaine in the point of ladeing silver.

Capta Jacoby [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 16th of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the libertie of England)
by authoritie of Parliament, against the silver)
laden aboard the Saint Paul, hendrick Luck master)

Examined upon an allegation given in on the behalfe
of Adrian Yoncker and others the 13th
of this present.

1

Hendrick Luck of Hamborough Mariner master of the said
shipp the Saint Paul aged 36 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined.

To the first article of the said allegation and the schedule annexed and bills
of lading therein mentioned and showne unto him, hee saith and deposeth
that in or about the moneth of October last past, there were laden
and put aboard the shipp the Saint Paul arlate in the port of Cadiz in the
dominion of the king of Spaine the severall and respective quantities and
parcells of silver mentioned in the said schedule, to be thence transported and
carried in the said shipp to hamborough and there to be delivered to the severall
and respective persons schedulated or their assignes
according to the said respective bills of lading, videlicet one bagge marked 'K.'
containing one thousand peeces of eight, consigned to and going for the accompt
of Adrian Yoncker merchant of hamborough. Item to Albert Ankelman
merchant of hamborough ten baggs contayning together two thousand peeces of eight
marked 'A.' Item to daniel Ropke merchant of hamborough one bagg
contayning 500 peeces of eight marked 'R.' Item to derrick Cordes merchant
of hamborough one bagg No.3. contayning three hundred thirtie six peeces of
eight marked [MARKE] Item to Joachim van Campen Pardons sonne merchant
of hamborough one bagge containing one thousand peeces of eight marked 'C.'
Item to ffrancis Wallich merchant of hamburgh one bagge containing
three hundred twentie five peeces of eight marked 'WW.' Item [?Sivert] [?Goodman]
a skipper laded a thousand peeces of eight, being freight [?caried] by his shipp and
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.224v Annotate
goe for the accompt of his [?common] owners, consigned to Jacques van [?RXXX]
of Hamborough. All which hee knoweth because hee this deponent received
all the said silver aboard the said shipp and signed bills of
lading for the same with his owne hand, namely three bills of lading (all of one tenor) for
each parcell, and that every of the bills of lading nowe showed unto
him were and are one of the said three soe signed by him at or about the time
of the said lading, and were brought alonge and seized in the said shipp, and
the same were and are true and reall bills of lading,
in respect of the baggs, quantities of silver, markes and [?XXXX]
and persons to whom consigned and to whose accompt, but for the
persons therein said to be the laders hee doth not knowe
them, or any by those names, yet hee well knoweth the true laders, and knoweth them
to be such as are free [?in ?XXXXXing to ?XX nation ?XXXXX ?XXX burgers and Spaniards ?XXXXXX]
of names of the laders in the bills expressed hee beleeveth them to be feigned in reagard of [?XXXX]
And further saith that
hee well knoweth all the persons mentioned and said in the said schedule
to be of Hamborough, to be really and truely there dwelling and subiects
of that place, this deponent living alsoe there, where hee saith hee was
borne. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the crosse Interrogatorries.

To the first hee saith hee hath not any part or share in the said silver
or any part thereof.

To the second hee saith hee had not any license or passeport of the laders for
the said silver aboard the said shipp.

To the third and 4 negatively, saying hee knoweth not any person of the name
of William Johason, nor sawe any such at Cales that hee knoweth of, nor
any other of the persons interrogated, saving the said Sivert Goodman, whom
hee there sawe, and received of him the silver laden in his name, and
otherwise referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and saving the same
hee cannot depose.

To the 5th hee saith the said Adrian Yoncker and all the rest of the Hamburghers
schedulated drive a greate trade in Spaine, and send goods thither in many shipps
And otherwise hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 6th hee referreth himselfe to the said bills of lading remayning in
this Court and to his foregoing deposition, and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 7th and 8th hee saith hee signed all the said bills aboard, and that hee
delivered the two for each parcell to the Barkero or such other person that
brought the same, and kept the third for each parcell (being all [?XX]
the said bills nowe showne unto him) was never out of his possession
till the seizure in question. And saith hee remembreth not the  names
of such barkeros or persons that brought the said bills to be signed
and received the said  two for each parcell back from hom, and otherwise
hee cannot answer saving his foregoing deposition.

To the 9th and 10 hee cannot depose for hee never brought any silver from [?Cadiz]
before, nor knoweth what othes doe therein.

To the 11th and twelveth hee saith hee cannot depose, not knwoing
ought of the matters interrogated as hee saith, but hath heard that it is
dangerous to lade greate quantities of silver at Cadiz [?XXXXX]

[?heyndrick] [?luck] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.225r Annotate
The 19th of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers et cetera against the Wheele of ffortune)
aforesaid.)

Examined upon the foresaid allegation
and schedules.

2.

John Baptista de la Mot of Cadiz in Spaine Merchant
aged 24 yeares or thereabouts sworne in Court and
examined.

To the said allegation and schedule annexed, and to the tenn baggs therein mentioned
said to containe each five hundred pattoacons No. 1. to 10 and to be marked [MARKE] and
to the bill of lading thereof nowe showed unto him amongest the bills remayning
in this Court as found aboard at the time of the seizure, hee saith and deposeth
that on the 22th day of the moneth of October 165 last past the said tenn baggs of silver
under the said marke and numbers and containing as aforesaid were laden aboard the said shipp the Wheele
of ffortune in the port of Cadiz to be thence transported to Hamborough in the
said shipp and there to be delivered to Albert Anquelman merchant of
Hamborough for his the said Alberts accompt, and that upon the deliverey
thereof aboard the said shipp there were three bills of lading (all
of one tennor) signed for the same by Jacob Gevers master of the said  vessell
and that the said bill nowe showed  unto him was and is one of the said bills
and was and is true and reall, which hee knoweth to be true for that hee
this deponent as partner of and weith ffrancisco de la Sierpe (mentioned
in the said bill as lader hereof) told the said moneys, and put the same up into
the said baggs, and sealed the same, and delivered them to the Barkero to be
carried aboard the said shipp, which barquero having put them into his
boate, this deponent went alsoe into the same boate, and went aboard
the said shipp and delivered the same to the said master together with
the three bills all of one tenor, which the said master in this depponents
sight and presence signed aboard in the bay of Cadiz, which being donne
this deponent (as the custom is in like cases) tooke two of them and
left the third, being the said bill now showed unto him, with the said master
to be brought alonge in the shipp, which hee well knoweth to be the same
and to be filled up with the proper hand of the said ffrancisco de la Sierpe his
this deponents said partner, with whose hand writing hee is very well
acquainted, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first  hee answereth negatively.

To the second negatively, saying that there was noe license for the lading the
said silver.

To the third and fourth hee saith that hee sawe the interrogated Otto hillibrant
(whom hee well knoweth) at Cadiz while the said shipp was there as
likewise the said de la Sierpe, and otherwise saving his foregoing deposition
hee cannot depose, and saving hee doth not knowe any person by the
name of William Johnson.

To the fifth hee saith the said silver is the proceede and retourne of wax
linnen cloth, knives and other goods sent by the said Albert Anquelman
in severall hamborough shipps to the said ffrancesco de la Sierpe to Cadiz
and [?XXXXX] in the shippd of Daniell Straetman, haie sch[?orkar]
and others in the space of a yeare two or three before the said lading
by the said Ankelman as hee saith sending in almost every shipp that cometh
from hamborough.

To the sixth hee saith that hee knoweth not either of the persons interrogated
personally, but hath received letters from the said ffrancis Sloyer from Hamborough
who principally (as hee taketh it) correspondeth with [?XXXX] Molastein of
Cadiz whose Christian name or forename hee knoweth not

To the 7th hee knoweth that the foresaid silver by him deposed of was
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.225v Annotate
and is belonging to and for accompt of the said Albert Anquelman, being
the same was and is the effect of the goods sent by the said Albert
to Cadiz of this deponents certaine knowledge, referring himselfe to his
foregoing deposition.

To the 8th hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and cannot
otherwise depose.

To the 10th hee cannot depose, for hee corespondenth with noe Hollanders, and
knoweth sometimes of silver sent for ffrance with license.

To the 11th hee cannot depose as hee saith.

To the 12 and 13th hee saith that it is prohibited and unlawfull in Spaine
to lade and export silver bullion or money thence without licence [?XXX]
and entrie thereof first obtained and made and that if it be [?XXXXXX] laden
without license and entrie, and be met with and seized by the Kings
officers in that behalfe authorized, it is confiscable and forteited to the
kinge, yet the laders are frequently admitted to compound for the same
and redeeme it, but if it come aboard the shipp it is cleare, and
and noe losse of proprietie therein unlesse actually seized ashore or
in the boat before it gets aboard the shipp

Joan Bautta. de la Motta [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 24th of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Libertie of England)
against the shipp Patriach Jacob (Claus)
Colebrandt master) and against Brands and others)

Examined upon an allegation given on
the behalfe of the said Brands
and others the 13 of December 1653.

.j.

Claus Verreden of Hamborough Mariner
aged 56 yeares or thereabouts sorne and
examined.

To the first and 2 articles hee saith and deposeth that hee well knoweth that
about foure yeares since Claus Colbrand the nowe master of the said shipp
the Patriach Jacob, was by daniel Brands, Adolph Sumpton and others
of Hamborough sent into holland to cause or
procure a shipp to be there built for their use and accompt, which hee
accordingly accomplished, as this deponent hath often heard from the
said Brands and others (her owners) and that the shipp the Patriach Jacob
in question was and is the same shipp soe built, and that ever since her
said building the said daniel Brands and company, have bin and are
commonly said and accompted to be the true and lawfull owners thereof
and soe to be at this present and to be all Hamburgers and there dwelling
and that the said shipp hath from time to time ever since her said building
bin accompted and reputed to belonge to the port of hamborough and to bee
a hamborough shipp, the premisses hee tooke the more notice of being
himselfe a skipper of Hamburgh and well acquainted with the said Claus Colbrand and with his said [?XXX]
and goinge for Holland in the said imployment of his said owners, who had [?XXX]
bin his said owners in two other shipps that hee had before had, and further
hee sawe and tooke notice that the last yeare that they at Hamborough [?caused]
to be made by a neighbour of this deponent and a greate anchor [?XXX]
this deponents anchor smith, and sent the same with [?XXX]
appurtenance to haver da Grace for the said shipp, And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the third article hee saith that the said Claus Colbrand hath bin and
is commonly accompted and reputed the master and commander of [?XXXX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.226r Annotate
shipp since her said building  in the sevice and employment of her said owners
and to be alsoe a part owner, and to have made severall voyages with her to severall
parts and places. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 4th hee cannot depose.

To the 5th article and schedules arlate nowe showne unto him  hee saith that the
said schedules are sealed with the usuall seale of the citie of hamborough
with which hee is well acquainted, being a hamburger and having had severall passes
and other Instruments under the same, and hee beleeveth the said exhibits to be
true and reall

To the 6 hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 7th hee saith that about two yeares since hee this deponent was at haver
da Grace where hee saw the said shipp then lying under the command of the
said Claus Colbrand taking in bales of linnen for Cadiz in Spaine; and
further that in Aprill last or thereabouts the said master comming to
hamborough for furniture and provisions for his said shipp, carried the said anchor
and sailes and a parcell of beefe and stockfish (which were provided
by his said owners) thence for haver da Grace for his said shipp in two Boyers
of hamborough, of the one whereof Christofer Boyen was master and
Alerd hillibroneson of the other. And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving this
deponent was then at hamborough and tooke notice of the said sending the said
things away.

To the 8th hee saith that the said owners have constantly and from time to time
taken upon them to be owners of the said shipp, and for such they have binn
from time to time looked upon and accompted at Hamborough by this deponent
and generally by all masters and others acquainted with them and taking notice
of the shipping and trade of that towne.

To the 9th hee cannot depose saving hee sawe a Hamborough flagge
sent from Hamborough for the said shipp, and saving that when this
depoent was soe at Haver de Grace as aforesaid, shee had not to his remembrance
any flagge or colours up shee then lying in the dark.

To the 10 11 and 12th hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 13th hee saith that hee well knoweth the arlate Daniel Brands
Adolph Sumpton, John Noris, Bosell van Bustle and the said master
Claus Colbrand, and saith they were and are Hamburgers and burgers
and subiects of that free state, and have lived many yeares there, and the least time
that this deponent hath knowne any of them there dwelling, hath bin
fifteen yeares. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith that hee this deponent was borne at Draughtas
in the Bishoprick of Bremes, and hath lived and bin a married
man and housekeeper in Hamburgh two and thirtie yeares last, and otherwise
negatively.

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the said Claus Colbrand for theise
thirtie yeares last, during which space hee the said Claus hath bin a
constant dweller in hamburgh, and is accompted a native of that place
and otherwise hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid

To the 3 4 and 5 hee saith that as hee hath heard the said shipp was built
at Serdam in Holland and otherwise hee cannot depose for hee was not
there nor sawe any mony paid for the said shipp/

Claus van [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctors Clerke and Godolphin
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said allegation.

2.

Zacharias Milde of Hamborough Mariner, aged 26 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.226v Annotate
To the first second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
the shipp the Patriarch Jacob arlate ever since her building (which as hee
hath bin credibly informed happened in the yeare 1648) in holland by
order and direction of her owners arlate) hath bin and is commonly accompted
and reputed to be belonging to the port of Hamborough and to be a Hamborough
shipp, And that Daniel Brands, Adolph Sumpton, John Noris, [?Bostel]
Van Bostle of Hamburgh were and are accompted jher
owners, and to have caused and paid for her said building upon their owne
accompt, and saith that his this deponents father John Milde was and
is a broker at Hamborough and in that qualitie doth the affaires of the
said owners, merchants there, and this deponent hath often heard
him say that they caused her to be fitted and furnished and paid for her and said [?they]
were her sole owners and further that the said
Claus Colbrand her nowe master hath bin and is commonly accompted
master of her and to have bin master ever since her said building, and
to have bin sent and imployed by the said owners for her building, And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 4th article hee saith hee cannot depose saving
as aforesaid.

To the 5th and schedules annexed hee saith the said schedules were and are
sealed with the usuall seale of Hamborough and verily beleeveth the
contents thereof to be true.

To the 6 and 7th hee saith that in the Springe last past hee this deponent
being at Hamborough, there sawe and tooke notice that the said
skipper Claus Colbrand came thither and provided himselfe with
sailes, a great anchor and about eight barralls of stockfish
for his said shipp, which was  said to be then lying at Haver de Grace, for
which place and port hee shipped the same in the boyers of Albert
Hillbrands and ffrederick Boyer of Hamborough bound out abd
departing for Haver de Grace, and about Whitsuntide last this
deponent being at Hamburgh sawe that there was sent from thence
by the said owners for Cadiz in Spaine for the said shipp a
parcell of tenn barralls or thereabouts of flesh, and [?XXX]
in the shipp of Hanie Schonback of Hamborough bound thither, which
goods this deponents said father (as hee told this deponent) caused
or procured to be assured at Hamburgh on the behalfe of the said owners
who (as thee said) paid for the same, and sent the same to and for the
shipp the Patriarch Jacob for Cadiz. And otherwise hee cannnot depose

To the 8 hee saith that the said producents have from time to time
taken upon the ownershipp of the said shipp and bin looked upon and
accompted for such.

To the 9th hee saith that hee welll knoweth that in the yeere 1648 [?there]
was a hamburger flagg bought at hamborough in the house of one
[?Garret] Witt on the Voorsetten for the said shipp by the said master Claus
Colbrandt.

To the 10. 11. and 12 hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 13 hee saith hee well knoweth all the persons arlate to bee
hamburgers, and there dwelling and subiects and burgers of that
citi, and soe to have bin for many yeares last. Andotherwise hee
cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee this rendent was borne at Hamburgh and hath
dwelt there all his time, and otherwise negatively.

To the second hee saith he hath knowne the said Claus Colbrand to be [?living
at hamborough for all the time of this deponents remembrance And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

Ti the 3. 4 and 5 hee saith the said shipp as hee hath heard was [?XXXX]
[?SXXXXXX]. and otherwise saving as aforesaid hee cannot depose

[?XXXXX] [?WXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.227r Annotate
Examined upon the allegation given in on the behalfe
of harman [?Rentzehl] and others the 13 of
december 1653.

The Keepers of the libertie of England against the)
[?Owners] of the Crowne Imperiall, hance Maimers master)
against harman Rentzel and others.)

1

Hance Meimers of hamburgh Mariner, master of the said 
shipp the crowne Imperiall, aged 43 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined

To the first article of the said allegation and to the schedule annexed and bills
of lading therein mentioned nowe showne unto him, hee saith and deposeth
that in or about the moneth of October last past there were laden and
put aboard the shipp the Crowne Imperiall in the port of Cadiz
in the dominion of the Kinge of Spaine the severall and respective
quantities and parcells of silver mentioned in the said schedule, to be
thence carried and transported in the said shipp to hamborough and there
to be delivered to the persons and for the accompt as in the said bills of
lading is expressed, videlicet two barrs marked 'HR' n. 1. 2. containing together
six hundred peeces of eight, and 2 baggs no. 3. 4. conteyning seaven hundred
and fiftie peeces of eight, and one bagge no. 5 containing two hundred
peeces of eight (for which one bagg no. 5, hee saith there is a particular
bill) consigned to, and going for accompt of harman Rentzel merchant
of hamburgh. Item to ffrancis Sloyer merchant of hamburg one barr of
silver marked DGAMATA. n. 15. alloy 2376. wighting 142 markes 6 ounces. Item
to the same one barr of silver marked '''&amp;#42;''' n. 10. alloy 2380, weighing 49 markes 6 ounces

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.227v Annotate
at Cadiz aboard the said shipp at or about the time of the said lading of the
said silver, and that there were noe other bills or bill of any other
tenor signed for the same or any part thereof, and saith that the bills nowe
showne unto him were and are (every one) one of the said bills soe by him signed
and were aboard at the time of the seizure and were and are a;; true bills [?XXX]
and further that all the merchants entioned in the said bills
to be of Hamburgh, were and are truely and really Inhabitants and subiects
of that place and well knowne unto him this deponent, and that the saud
Sivert Goodman of this deponents knowledge liveth in Wismar, and otherwise
referring himselfe to the said bills hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatorries

To the first hee answereth negatively

[ADD DATA]

To the 5 Interrogatorie shee saith that hee went from Hamborough with the
said shipp bound for Cales in July last and carried many peece goods hich
were laden and sent by the severall Hamburger merchants aforesaid said
in the said bills to have silver sent them for their owne accompt, and by
other particular Hamburgers, and this deponent dlivered the said peece goods
soe sent by the said Hamburger claimers in this businesse to the servants and
such as were sent by the merchants or factors at Cadiz (to whom the same were consigned)
to fetch and receive the same of him, and afterwards carried the said
silver of the said servants and persons. And otherwise hee cannot answer.

To the 6th hee saith hee well knoweth the interrogated ffrancis Sloyer, Adrian
Youncker and John Baptista Youncker living at Hamborough, where the said ffrancis
liveth in Saint Catherins streete, Adrian Youncker in the Dyke streete, and John Baptista
Youncker in the Greenestreet, And otherwise (saving as aforesaid) negatively.

[ADD DATA]

To the 8 hee saith that the bills nowe showed unto him were never out of
his this deponents possession from the time of signing thereof as aforesaid
to the time of the seizure interrate and delivering them up thereupon.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.228r Annotate
B.B.B.

The seaventh of November 1653.

The claime of the King of Poland for the)
goods in the George, John Peterson George Master)

Examined upon an allegation made in
the acts of Court the fourth instant and
an exhibit therein mentioned on the
behalfe of his said Majestie of Poland.

1

George d'Attivort of Roane in Normandie factor of the
said kinge aged 30 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined.

To the said allegation and exhibit nowe showne unto him hee saith and deposeth that
the said exhibit was and is the true and originall Charter  partie  for the [?XXXX]
wherein the said shipp and goods were seized, which hee knoweth being the factor and
freighter thereof, and hee acknowledgeth is said name to be written with his owne
hand, And saith that the same was delivered upon the marking thereof
to John Peterson Grÿpe master of the said shipp; And after the said
seizure this deponent having notice thereof came over expressely from Roane
about clearing the said shipp and goods for the said kinge for whose accompt shee
was freighted, And after the said shipp and goods were released by order of
the Counsell of State, this deponent came to the protcor imployed in this Court
on behalfe of the said kinge and desired to have out the papers brought in as
taken in the said vessell, and hee went alonge to the Registers office and procured
the said papers to be delivered out according to the decree of this Court, and
amongest the rest this deponent is well assured that the said Charter partie was
one, and the same  with the rest of the shipps papers were delivered to the said
,aster, and since redelivered by him to this deponent to be againe produced in
this Court on this occasion, and saith ut is the same Charter partie soe
asa aforesaid made at Roane, and delivered out of this Court amongest
the papers brought in thither by the seizors of the said shipp and ever since
the said delivery out till the late rebringing the same into this Court
the same hath bin in the hands of the said master.

g. dattivort [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation and schedule.

2.

John Peterson Grÿpe of hamborough Mariner, master of the
said shipp aged 44 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
and examined.

To the said allegation and schedule now showne unto him hee saith and deposeth
that the said schedule was and is the true and originall Charter partie
made for the nowe voyage wherein the said shipp and goods were seized by
Captaine Hutton, unto whom this deponent delivered the same amongest
his other papers (the said Hutton demanding them) and afterwards the
said shipp and goods being here ordered to be restored, this deponent
coming with his precontest George van Attivort to the Registers office for
his papers taken in the said shipp and brought in there, received the
said Charter partie amongst the rest, and ever since hath had it in his
custodie till his bringing the same lately into this Court upon the
present occasion, And saith the same was and is the Charter partie
soe made and was aboard at the time of the said seizure, and
from him come to the hands of the said Captaine Hutton, And saith hee
knoweth the premisses for the reasons aforesaid, and for that hee was one
of the parties to the said Charter partie and signed the same in ffrance
after the making thereof, and acknowledgeth his name thereto
to be written with his owne hand after and the making thereof in ffrance

Jon peterson grjp [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.228v Annotate
The 11th of November 1653.

The claime of the said Swebeck and others)
in the Golden Sunne)

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

See the first in AAA

2

Allard Edzerts of Bremes Merchant aged
35 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee
well knoweth the shipp the Golden Sunne arlate and hath soe donne
ever since shee was built and knew her before shee was finished and while shee
was upon the stocks in building, which her building happened at Bremes almost
nine yeares since, and saith there was another master put first into her after her
building, and for eight yeares last past or thereabouts the arlate Hendrick Punt
hath bin master of the said vessell of this deponents sight and knowledge
and was constituted master by her owners, namely Hendrick Swerbeck, Matthias
Simonds, William Hubeks, Hendrick [?Mezer], John Cuyper, Arent van
Buren, and Harman Jacobs, who with the said Hendrick Punt have for the said
eight yeares or thereabouts bin and are owners of her and of her tackle
and furniture and for such commonly accompted, saving that the said Matthias
Simonds as hee taketh it, came in to be an owner since the rest, namely about
foure yeares since, and saith the said owners were and are Inhabitants of
Breeme and subiects of that free citie and State and for such commonly
accompted, which hee deposeth being alsoe a burgher and a merchant
there and there borne and having lived there all his time, and being by
that meanes well acquainted with the said owners and such their proprietie
and having often seene them sett her out to sea and fit and furnish her as the
owners of the said vessell. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

Upon the rest not examined by direction of the producent, not being on the voyage.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith that the said master and Mr Christian Elers spake ti him and
desired him to come and speake the truth in this businesse, and otherwise negatively

To the seecond hee saith that the said owners caused the said shipp to be built all
saving the said Simonds, who since came to his ownershipp as aforesaid, And
otherwise saving his foregoeing deposicon hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith that many of the said owners were borne in Breme, and
they have all lived in and bin Burghers of the free towne and state for theise
tenn yeares last and upwards, and otherwise negatively saving as aforesaid
referring himselfe to his foregoeing deposicon.

To the 4. 5. 6 and 7th hee cannot further depose than as aforesaid, not being on the
said voyage nor knowing ought thereof.

Alerdt Edzerts [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three Judges.
----
The 12th day of November 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

6

Hendrick Punt of Bremen mariner master
of the sayd shipp the Golden Sunn aged 34 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
shipp the Golden Sunn whereof this deponent for 7 yeares now past
hath bene master was built att Bremen in the yeare 1645. of the [?XXX]
knowledge and sight of this deponent. And for a shipp so built the
sayd Golden Sunn hath bene from tyme to tyme from the first building
thereof commonly accounted reputed and taken And otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.229r Annotate
To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith, That in the
monethes of June July August September and October 1653 and att
the tyme of the taking and surprizeing of the sayd shipp and her lading
and for 7 yeares before the arlate Henry
Suerbock and Company that is to say the arlate Matthias Symonds
William [?Honbekin] Hendrick Meyer John Cuyper, Arent van Buren
Harman Jacobbs and this deponent, which were and are Inhabitants
of Breme and subiects of the free State thereof, were and are the
true and lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp the Golden Sun her tackle
apparell and furniture, which he knoweth being master and partowner
of the sayd shipp and well knoweth that the sayd shipp was built as aforesayd
by the sayd Suerbock and Companie for their owne use and Accompt and that they have
continued owners ever since, and fitted her out to sea, and received the
proffitts arising by her from tyme to tyme. And otherwise cannot depose
saving that this deponent bought his share therein .7. yeares agoe as is hereafter sett forth.

To the third article of this allegation This deponent saith that the arlate shipp
the Golden Sunn in the moneth of August last past did sett sayle from Breme
by order of her foresayd Owners under the conduct of this deponent in her
ballast onely bound for Rochell in ffrance, and in her passage was by
stresse of weather forced into fflushing in Zealand, whither being
come, this deponent finding it very requisit to build or make a new
halfe deck for the sayd shipp, did in the moneth of September 1653
last past cause a new halfe deck to be there built for the sayd shipp
according as in his former examination taken att Dover he hath sett
forth: And saith that he this deponent before his departure from flushing
did really and truly pay to the Carpenter Smith and other workemen
employed therein for timber, iron workmanshipp and materalls
in the sayd worke used and employed the moneyes due for the same. to witt
three hundred fifty five livers or guilders. And moreover saith
that noe Hollander or ffrenchman or any other person subiect of the
States of the United Provinces or ffrench King, or of any other
Prince of State in hostility with the Commonwealth of England
had or hath any right title or interest in or to the sayd shipp or any
part thereof. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
sayd shipp Golden Sunn in her Course for fflushing upon her voyage
to ffrance was surprized by the arlate Captaine Granger, and that
at the tyme of the sayd seizure there were severall writings aboard
the said shipp that did concerne the same, and particularly a sea Brief
or pasport under the seale of the Citty of Breme and a Certificat or
attestation under the like seale touching this presemt voyage and also an
English passe or Certficat from the present or late Major of Dartmouth
and the like from the Deputy Collector of Plymouth, certifying of the
say shipps there being att those ports, which papers or writing soone
after the seizure this deponent being commanded or requested so to doe
delivered into the hands of the sayd Captaine Granger who hath since
disposed thereof att his pleasure and never returned the same to this
deponent And otherwise cannpot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that after the
said seizure, This deponent was brought to Dover and there examined
on
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.229v Annotate
on or about the 11th day of October 1653 last past. Andmoreover
saith that after his being so examined	 and being in Company in the
howse att the signe of the Starr in Dover with the sayd Captaine Granger and his Leiftenant
and one [?Deaatch], hee the sayd Granger did violently take from this
deponent in the sayd howse twenty eight sylver Leweses and an halfe
fourteene ffrench Crownes in gold three pistolls in gould, and [?foure]
ducketoones of sylver which were the proper moneyes of him this
deponent, and carryed and tooke the same along with him, and deteyned
and still doth deteyne the same from him this deponent. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that of the
certaine knowledge of this deponent there was in the Poores box of
the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure 15 peices of eight and some
small peices of sylver and that since the sayd Granger possest
himselfe of the sayd shipp the foresayd 15 peices of eight and other
the poores moneys taken out and the sayd poores box broken, And
this deponent hath heard by his steersman that the sayd poores box
was so broken open by the sayd Granger himselfe with the assistance
of his Leiwetenant, and the sayd moneyes taken out of the same
by them the sayd Granger and his Leivetenant. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegaccon This deponent saith, that the sayd
shipp the Golden Sunn and her lading now in question were in fact
taken and surprized by the sayd Granger and Company in the moneth
of October 1653. in the course of the sayd shipp the Golden Sunn
from fflushing to Rochell in ffrance, which he knoweth being
master of the sayd shipp, and present abord her att the tyme of seizure
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposiccons are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatory he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause by
the advise and direction of Mr Samuell ffrancklin one of the
Proctors of this Court, and sauth he hath one sixth part in the sayd
shipp which he hopes will be restored to him, and allso one hundred [###]

[###] [AT 90 DEGREES TO PAGE] and fity cheese. 12 firkins of salmon one dry fatt of Cloves
and eight bagges of Cloves  all which this Rendent did lade
aboard the sayd shipp att fflushing for his owne Accompt and Risgo

[?XXXX XXXX] [SIGNATURE]

To the second Interrogatory this Rendent saith that he this Rendent hath bene
part onwer of the sayd shipp for .7. yeares now past and bought his said
part therein of Court Luyson of Breme one of the originall owners
and builders and first master of her, to whom about 7 yeares past
the sayd owners according to contract paid three hundred and [?fourtie]
dollars, and this Rendent did satisfy and pay about the same tyme
att Breme to the foresayd Hendrick Suerbock and Company the
like somme of 380 dollars for the sayd 6th part of the sayd shipp
And the rest of the Owners were and are Originall Owners from
the first building of the sayd shipp as he hath above sett forth. And saith
he knoweth not of any bill of sale made of or for the sayd shipp or
any part thereof; it being not usuall so to doe att Breme And
otherwise referring to the foregoeing depositccons he cannot depose

(To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.230r Annotate
To the 3d Interrogatorie. he saith the foresayd Owners doe all live in Breme
and are Burghers there, and have [?XXXX] wives Children and families
there, and were and are subiects of the free State of Breme, whereof
this Rendents certaine knowledge they have lived theis ten yeares last
past and upwards and indeed all their tymes respectively. and they
nor any of them within theis 12 monethes now past have lived in any
port or place in Holland or Zealand.

To the 4th Interrogatory he saith the lading aboard the sayd shipp was taken in
aboard the sayd shipp att fflushing in Zealand, and saith that the interrate
Marsas Scults did there lade aboard tenn balls or baggs of pepper and 290.
Cheeses [&amp;#42;] 

[LH MARGIN AT OP DEGREES] 
[&amp;#42;] and [?in] that case with 2 Castors therein, and one
small fardell but what was therein this Rendent
(as he saith) knoweth not. And saith. that severall
passengers whose names he remembreth not did
likewise putt [?XXXXX] sp [?XXXX] Cheeses and [?XXXX]
[XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] [XXXX] [SIGNATURE]

And saith he knoweth well the sayd Marsas Scults and last saw
him att fflushing in Zealand, and saith. he was borne att Breme of
the certaine knowledge of this Rendent who hath knowne him from a child
and was well acquainted with his parents and the sayd Scults is a subiect
of the free State of Breme and so accounted and hath his dewlling
there for the most part with his sister, but by reason of his present course
of lie which he spends in merchandizing and travelling to and
fro betwixt Breme and ffrance, he hath noe fixed howse and family
being a young man and a bachiler; and hath so traded and travelled
for ten yeares now last past or thereabouts. and saith he was att fflushing
att the tyme he laded he sayd pepper and Cheeses and other things but hath not any
habitation there or elswhere under the Jurisdiction of the States of the
United Provinces, nor ever had so farr as this Rendent knoweth
beleiveth or hath heard. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith the sayd Marsas Scults did putt and lade aboard
the sayd shipp att fflushing for hs owne Accompt the foresayd pepper
Castors, small fardell and 290. Cheeses.
And further he cannot depose.

To the .6. he saith he this deponent did himselfe pay the moneyes aforesayd
for the sayd shipps new deck att fflushing, and brought the sayd moneyes
with him in his sayd shipp from breme./

To the .7.th Interrogatory he saith that he this Rendent did receyve the three
papers now shewne him one whereof is a bill of lading for part of the sayd
Schults goods, att fflushing aforesayd, and the same were aboard the sayd
shipp att the tyme of seizure. And saith that one of the sayd papers being
a letter was delivered to this Rendent att fflushing by the sayd Schults
but whether the sayd Schults did write the same att fflushing he saith
he cannot depose being wholly ignorant where or when it
was written. And otherwise he cannot depose

[?XXXXX ?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before the three Judges.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.230v Annotate
The 15th of November 1653.

The claime of Peter Mayer and company)
of Lubeck for the shipp the Hope of Lubeck (hendrick)
Venter master) and for her freight)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the said claimers given the
4th instant

1.

Claes Maltz of Wismar Mariner aged 39 yeares
ore thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
hee well knoweth the shipp the hope arlate, which hee saith was built at Lubeck
and being newe proceeded thence on her first voyage in or about the moneth of
January last at which time this deponent was there and saw her proceed
under the conduct of the said hendrick Venter her master, and saith her company
were and are all accompted Lubeckers and there dwelling and subiects of the free
State, thereof which namely Peter Meyer and Joachim Baltenhagen and the said master hee this
deponent well knoweth to be there dwelling and subiects of that place, And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To he first hee saith hee sawe not the said shippe upon the stocks in building
but sawe shee was wholly newe when shee soe proceeded from Lubeck and it was
the common speech there that shee was new built and that that was her first
voyage, nor hath hee seene her since shee was seized, but hath severall times
mett with and seene her said master and understood from him that hee was taken
in the same shipp with this deponent sawe her soe proceede in from Lubeck.

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the said master hendrick venter for
theise five or six yeares last or more, during all which space hee hath dwellt in
Lubeck where hee nowe liveth and where as this deponent beleeveth hee was
borne and hath dwellt all his time, and saith hee the said hendrick hath bin
married about two yeares, during all which space his wife hath dwelt in
Lubeck, the place of her biorth. And further hee deposeth that
hee hath knowne the said Peter Mayer about three yeeeres and
Joachim Baltery about tenn yeares, and saith hee had speech with [?him] [?in]
Lubeck at the time of the said shipps said proceeding, and thereby came to heare
of their said proprietie. And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot
depose.

To the last hee saith hee doth not beleeve that the said shipp or any part thereof belongeth to any
hollander or ffrench man or that any subiect or subiects of the States of the
United Netherlands or of the ffrench kinge khad or have any interest therein

[?Claes ?Malts] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

2

Walter Jonson of Lubeck Mariner, master of the White
Swann of Lubeck nowe lying at Dover, aged 44 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the first and second atrticles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee well knoweth the shipp the hope arlate hendrick Venter master and hath
soe donne ever since shee was built, and sawe the raisinge and setting in her [?maste]
and other worke towards her furinishing at Lubeck in the spring last and saith shee
was there built by her owners arlate, and that this deponent well knoweth
foure of them namely Peter Meyer, John Witt, Joachim Baltenhagen and
hendrick Venter, but doth not knowe the arlate david [?dollessen] but
hath heard that hee is alsoe a part owner of the said shipp, and that there are [?noe]
others that have any interest in the said vessell but hee and the said sother foure
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.231r Annotate
and saith that the said Witt is alsoe one of this deponents owners, and in the Springe last
before the said shipp finishingg and proceeding from Lubeck this deponent had speech
with the said Peter Mayer John Witt, Joachim Baltenhagen and hendrick Vanter
and heard them say that they together with the said detlefson were the sole owners
of the said vessell tackle and furniture, And further hee saith they were and are
commonly accompted and reputed. And further that hee this deponent hath well
knowne the said Peter Mayer, John Witt Joachim Baltenhagen and hendrick
Venter for theise twenty yeares last and upwards during which space they have
lived and live at present in Lubeck and were and are Burghers and Subiects
of that free state and for such they and the said detlefson were and are commonly
reputed, which hee knoweth being alsoe an Inhabitant and burgher there and
having soe bin for above twenty yeares last. And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee sawe the said shipp at Lubeck as aforesaid in the Springe
last before shee was quite finished, but hath not since seene her this deponent
then departing thence on a voyage, but hath mett and severall times lately seene
her said master here, who saith shee lieth nowe at Dover. And otherwise hee cannot
answer saving as aforesaid.

To the second hee saith the said master is a lubecker borne, and hath lived all
or the most of his time there, and hath bin married there about a yeere and a
halfe last to one of the same towne, And otherwise hee cannot depose saving
as aforesaid.

To the last hee saith hee beleeveth the contrary referring himselfe to his
foregoing deposition.

WOL .TER  JO . HAN . SEN [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before the three
Judges in Court.
----
The 16th of November 1653.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

3.

John Groobe of Lubeck Mariner master of a shipp of that port
nowe lying at Dover aged 42 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined

To the first and second articles of the said allegation gee saith that hee
well knoweth the shipp the Hope arlate (Hendrick Venter master) and her owners arlate
Peter Meyer David Detlefson, John Witt, Joachim Baltenhagen and the said
Hendrick Venter, and saith the said shipp was built at Lubeck about a yeere
since by the said owenrs of this deponents sight and knowledge, living there
and seeing the said worke goe on by their ordering, whereof this deponent came to
take the more notice being a master of a shipp of that same port, and the said Venter
was put master of the said shipp by the said owners, and for the true and
sole owners thereof the said persons were and are commonly accompted, and saith
that this is her first voyage. And further that the said Peter Meyer and all
the said other owners predeposed were and are Inhabitants of the citie of
Lubeck and subiects of that free state and for such commnly reputed,
which hee knoweth being alsoe Inhabitant and a subiect there. And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee sawe the said shipp building at Lubeck as aforesaid
and about tenn dayes since hee sawe her at Dover, whether shee is brought
up by a private man of warr, and well knoweth her to be the same having
as aforesaid seene her at Lubeck both in building and finished.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.231v Annotate
To the 2 hee saith hee hath knowne the said hendrick Venter from the childhood
of him the said hendrick who was borne at Lubeck where his father was also
a skipper  and well knowne to this deponent, and saith hee is maried and
had his wife at Lubeck  where shee was alsoe borne, and where they have lived
together ever since their mariage; and saith the said other owners are alsoe
of Lubeck and have lived there all their times of this deponents knowledge
where was alsoe borne and hath lived all his time there and were and are
all subiects of that free State, And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the last hee saith hee beleeveth the contrary, And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

[?XXX] [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as aforesaid.
----
The 16th of November 1653.

The Keepers of the Libertie of England)
by authoritie of Parliament against the)
shipp the Saint George Martin Stackhowe)
master)

Rowe dt

Martin Stackhowe of hamborough
Mariner master of the shipp the Saint
George of hamborough aged 52 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne in Court and
examined upon certaine Interrogatories ministred
on the behalfe of the State saith as followeth

To the first hee saith hee was master of the said shipp the Saint George
at the time of her seizure, and hath bin master of her about five yeares
last past, and that hee liveth and hath lived and bin maried in hamborough
for theise three and twentie yeares last past or thereabouts and was borne in Wallein in
Pommerland.

To the second hee saith that hee came from Malaga and was bound for
hamborough with the said shipp at the time of the said seizure, and that
shee began her outward voyage from hamborough in July last or thereabouts
bound for Malaga upon and for account of his freighters merchnats of
hamborough, namely derrick dobbelaer, John Eckhoff, Everd Ankelman
harman Rentzel, Godfrey Sch[?ult]. [?haisse] Schooback, Zacharie [?Sinkland]
and others mentioned in his Charter partie whereunto hee referreth himself
the same being seized and brought into this Court, And saith the said
derrick dobbelaer and John Eckhoff were and are alsoe part owners of
the said ship. And otherwise saving the said Charter partie hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith hee carried outwards from hamborough the said voyage
peace goods, pipe staves and caseke staves, which were laden by and for accompt
of the said freighters who freighted the said shipp out and home, and saith
they were consigned and delivered to William Eckhoff, Maurice
halmers, Michael [?Peyel]. Joachim Alers, Christofer [?Burstle], and Jacob
Wolfkin at Malaga, and that the said shipp hath bin in noe other port
since her comming from hamborough but at Malaga alone till her
said seizure and bringing into Plimouth

To the fourth hee saith that hee was cleared and went from ffalmouth in
ffebruary last and came to hamborough in the same month, and there remained
with his said shipp continually till his said departure thence in July last for
Malaga, and that hee carried wine and fruite from ffalmouth
to hamborough which hee alsoe had brought from Malaga for accompt
of his said freighters or most of them and other merchants of hamborough
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.232r Annotate
To fifth and 6th hee saith that this deponent hath bin master of the said shipp ever since
shee was built, and that shee was built att hamborough about five yeares since
and was constituted master by his owners being the same that are owners
of her, saving Jacob [?Redling] one of them is dead and his heires have sold his
part to Kinder Meyer, and that the rest of their names were and are John
Eckhoff, owner of an eighth part, Jurian Luders owner of an eighth part,
derrick dobbelar a 16th part, Jacob hambrooke a 16th part, Wilken
Wrede a 16th part, hance [?Clides] and hendrick Stockman 3 32th parts, hendrick
[?Smit] and harman yonge a 16th part, Joachim and ffrederick Red[?linge] a 16th
part, this deponent three sixteenth parts, Anna [?Bouckars] and Gerrit Witt
a 16th part, and the said Luider Meyers part is a 16th part, and saith
the said shipp cost building [?above] 24 thousand marks Lubecks, and this deponents
part cost proportionably to that summe. And saith the said owners were and
are all burghers of hamburgh,
and have all lived there severall yeares, and they of them that have
lived there the least while, have lived there seaven yeares, and they were and
are all subiects of the said free state of hamburgh, And otherwise hee
cannot depose.

To the seaventh hee saith that all the lading that was aboard at the time of the
said seizure was received and taken in at Malaga, and that hee well knoweth Melchior
Jacob, John hambroke [EDITOR, Hendrick is written above John and underlined], derrick and Bernard Elers, John Budier, Reynard Rulent
Michael [?Peper], Simon Malfort Cornelius van Jerusalem, William Eckhoff,
Simon Brands, and Maurice halmers, all (saving Bernard Elers who is in London) living in Malaga, to all or many
of which hee carried goods from hamborough, and otherwise hee cannot depose saying
hee doth not knowe the other persons interrogated by the names wherein they are
therein written, which hee beleeveth to be mistaken and wronge written.

To the eighth hee saith hee hath lived alwaies in hamburgh, and that hee knoweth
to be there living Arnout Belgiens, Phillip Verporten, hance van haldern
Peter [?Rover], hendrick Egger, Corneluis [?ffeber], harmann Rentzell, Peter
[?Gilden]. heyns Schonback. hance van Jerusalem, Everard Anquelman, hendrick
hambrock, Godfrey and Joachim Schultz, derrick dobbelar and John Eckhoff
Jurian Stridbeke and derrick Baken but knoweth not George Kirkpanr by that
name, and hath well knowne them for many yeares, and those whom hee hath
knowne for the least space hee hath knowne for six or seaven yeares, and that they
all live and have for all the time of his knowledge of them lived in hamburgh
And and (sic) the goods aboard or a greate part thereof are consigned unto them
referring himselfe to his bills of lading and papers aboard, and that hee carried
goods for them or many of them to Malaga, And otherwise saving his foregoing
depositions and his said bills and papers hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee saith hee had 19 men and boys aboard at the time of the said
seizure, all Easterlings and none of them a subiect of the States of the United
Netherlands, and that they went all from hamburgh, and saith that hee had
noe Sopra cargo aboard, but there was one Andrew Scrother a passenger
a hamburger that had foure lasts of wine and fruite aboard on his owne accompt
And otherwise negatively; saving that he had three passengerss more aboard
all ham[burgers]

To the 10th hee saith hee hath 12 or 13 pipes of wine and about 24 fatts of raisins
aboard for his owne accompt without bill of lading for the same, and his
[?folkes] have some goods aboard for which there is noe bill, besides hee himselfe as
factor for harman Rentzell laded 19 pipes of wine and 22 fatts of raisins and
[?50] frailes of raisins, for the said harman, and three pipes of wine for
Derick Jacobson a hamburger, And otherwise
referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition and his papers and bills aboard
hee cannot depose.

Martin Stechow [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before dr Clarke and dr Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.232v Annotate
The 17th of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Libertie of England by)
aithoritie of Parliament against the Saint)
John Baptist deriick heitman master.)

Examined upon the Interrogatories.

.j.

Derrick Heytman of hamborough Mariner master
of the said shipp the Saint John Baptist aged 39 yeares
or thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee is master of the
said shipp the Saint John Baptist and hee hath bin for hese three yeares last
and saith hee was borne at hamburgh and hath lived there all his time and
bin maried there for theise seaven yeares last and kept his wife and family
there, and was and is a burgher and a subiect of that free State.

To the second third and fourth hee saith hee came with the said shipp at the time of her seizure
from Malaga bound for dunquirke, and that shee was never at
hamborough since this deponent hath bin master of her, but being bought
at Amsterdam in May last ws two yeares by her [?nowe] owners
went thence to Ostend, thence to Cadiz, thence to
Malaga, thence to dunquirke, thence in summer last into the downes
and received goods from London, and dover and went therewith to Cales
and dischardged the same and thence went to Malaga and comming there
too soone for the vintage, met with order from his owners to goe to
[?Alicant] and take in salt for ballast, which hee did and [?when XX] [?to] Malaga
and there received his lading of fruite, woolls, mulasses and some pipes
of oile, and saith all the said voyages were upon freights by severall persons
and that from Amsterdam to Ostend shee went in ballast and there
laded [?peace] goods for severall merchants of fflanders and Brabant, and
that this last voyage from Cales to Malaga hee went in his ballast of
[?sand], And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fifth and 6th hee saith that the said shipp being built at Amsterdam about
three yeares since and this deponent put master of her from the first building
and hath soe continued, and there being at the first some holland owners
with hamburgers, and they disagreeing, the hamburgers (her present owners)
bought her wholely by themselves in May last was two yeares, and that
they live in severall place, and for their names, parts and place of aboad
hee sith the same were and are as followeth videlicet G[?e]romus Snitger of
hamburgh owner of a 16th part, daniel Brands of the same of a 16th
part, Adrian Goldsmith a hamburger living at Antwerp owner of 
six sixteenth parts, daniel Leon and ffrancis panniq two hamburgers
of Sevill each a 32th part. Vincent dal Campo a hamburger living at
Cales owner of a sixteenth part, Christofer Bussel a hamburger
living at Malaga a 16th part, Maurice halman, George [?Gryp] and
company of Malaga all hamburgers an 8th part, Boldwin Coleman of Gant an
eighth part; And saith the sauid shipp [?XXXX] cost 13200 gilders. And that the said
persons have dwellt severall yeares in the said severall places, only Adrian
Goldsmith hath not lived above a yeare and a halfe last or
thereabouts at Antwerp, having longe before lived in Spaine. And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the seaventh hee saith hee well knoweth the Interrogated Andreas von
[?Cantlebeke]. don Antonio da los Rios [?Sariasa]. Simon Brandes and
company, Maurice halmars and George Grip, Simon [?Mallfort], Andrew
[?Masta] and Charles van damme, and was in their company at Malaga
and formerly carried goods to them but not this voyage, and that some of them
were aboard him in the voyage at Malaga, and otherwise hee cannot depose
saving as aforesaid.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.233r Annotate
To the eight Interrogatorie hee hath not soe deposed, [?and] liveth and keepeth his
familie in hamburgh, but saith that hee knoweth the interrogated Adrian Goldsmith
and Charles Vinck, but carried noe goods for them the last time hee went from
dunquirke, whence hee departed in ballast and came into the downes as aforesaid
for his lading.

To the 9th hee saith hee hath about 28 eaters of his company, which hee saith hee
beleeveth are all Easterlings, and came first aboard at Dunquirke and
therwise negatively./

To the 10th hee saith hee hath two or three and twenty fatts of raisins in the [?XXX] aboard for
his owne accompt and 80 frailes of raisins, and 100 fatts of anchovas for his
owne accompt, all without bill of lading, and hath noe other goods aboard that
hee remembreth for which there is not a bill of lading, unlesse a fatt two or
three of wine, lemmons or some such thinge sent for a Regalo to friends.
And otherwise referring himselfe to the bills and papers taken aboard hee
cannot depose.

[?dyrXXX] [?huitman] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The 19th of November 1653.

Touching the)
[?XXX] busines.)

Cornelius Vanderhoeven of London Merchant aged 32 yeares or thereabouts
sworne before the right worshipful William Clerke and John Godolphin
doctors of Lawes, Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie
saith and intimateth by vertue of his oath

That according to letters of advise sent him, and by this deponent received from his
correspondents at Dantzike, a certaine shipp of Dantzicke named the John
C[?XXXsis] (alsoe the name of the King of Poland) Jacob Hennenberg master
departed about six weekes since from Dantzike bound for Riga to lade hemp
and wood for this port of London, But that her dispatches will be for
dunquirke to preserve her and her lading from the hollanders in case shee
should be met with by them. And saith the siad lading was and is for accompt
of Daniel Gossen, Giles hadersolof, Philip Usell and Giles Thibaut
who were and are owners of the said shipp and Inhabitants of dantzike and
well knowne to this deponent, and that the said lading comes consigned
to this deponent to this port for their accompt aforesaid, And for the further
information of this Court touching their proprietie in the said vessell, hee produceth
and leaveth a testimoniall from the Magistrates of the said citie of Dantzicke and under
the seale thereof dated the 17th of November last

Cornelius Vander Hoene [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 22th of November 1653.

The Keepers against the ffortune)
[?XXX]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4)

NIcholas Francklin of Maidstone in Kent Esquire
aged fifty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in the
monthes of July and August and September last past of this present yeare 1653
att Maidstone in Kent as well in the open market there as att the
private
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.233v Annotate
private howses of Gentlemen and ffarmers there liveing
good English wheat merchantable and well conditioned and that
was never damnifyed but sweet and good breadcorne was
commonly and ordinarily sold to Bakers and others for and att
the rate of one and twenty shillings by the quarter, and
some tymes att twenty shillings by the quarter, and att this
present the like good sweet wheat ir breadcorne is and
may be bought att Maidstone for the like somme of twenty
shillings by the Quarter, which this deponent knoweth being
an Inhabitant of Maidston aforesayd and seeing and well
observing the premisses to be true, videlicet good sound English
wheat in July and August last past, and in the monethes from
thence to this present moneth of November now current usually
sold att the respective rates aforesayd. And otherwise cannot
depose.

uppon the rest he is not examined by direction.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first second third and fourth Interrogatories hee saith hee
knoweth nothing thereof.

Nicholas ffrancklyn [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges)
----
The 22nd day of November .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of Isaack Phillips and)
Company Imployers of the shipp the Suckly)
whereof Christopher Ewingtin)
is Captaine to the Master and Company)
of the shipp the Boer whereof)
harman Hedden is Master. Smith.)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the begalfe
of the sayd Isaack Phillips.

.1.

Harman Hedden of Embden Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Boare or Blew
Boare aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatory this deponent saith he knoweth well the sayd shipp
the Boare and was and is Master of her, and saith she belongeth
to the port of Emden in East ffreezland, and her Owners were and
are all of them Emdeners subiects of the Grave of East ffreizland and he
doth not know where the sayd shipp was built nor by whom or att what
Costs and Charges. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatory he saith and deposeth that the names of the present
owenrs of the sayd shipp were and are as followeth videlicet [?Ellyers]
Duylf, Jan Jonsans, Comfort Weaver Thomas [?LXXys] Abraham Slosse, [?MaXX]
Woulx the widow of Henrick van Ruyt, Henricus Herardes
Jan Harmss. Jacob Simond. and Heire Holling [?XXXX]
each of them is owner of he knoweth not
and they for theis six yeares last past,
they have bene att Emden commonly reputed owners thereof, [?and ?XXX]
accordingly have had possession thereof, and employed the same and
receaved the profits thereby arising, and constituted this deponent
Master thereof but saith he knoweth not of whom they bought the same
nor saw any moneyes payd by them to any one for it. And further he
cannot depose.

To the third he saith that he this deponent was borne at Noord[?oop] in
East ffreizland 2 miles from Emden and liveth att Embden with
his wife Children and family and is a subiect of the Grave of
East ffreizland. and the shipps Company of the Boare were and are
all
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.234r Annotate
all East ffreezlanders, and most of them of Embden where there
habitation is, and were subiects of the sayd Grave of East ffreizland
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth Interrogatory he saith his foresayd owners live all of the att
Emden, and so have done for theis ten yeares last past and indeed all
their tymes respectively being Emdeners borne and so accounted, and
not any of the within theise .12. monethes last past hath lived in Holland
or Zeland or was or is a subiect of the States of the United Provinces.
and further cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith the merchants goods laden aboard the sayd shipp is
about one hundred and twenty lasts of salt and was laden about 
a moneth now past in the bay of Bernusse in ffrance, and was laden
by the factor of his foresayd owners Monsieur Van der Mede to
and for the use accompt and Risgo of his foresayd Owners, to be
transported from thence to Embden and there to be delivered to the
foresayd Owners; And saith this deponent hath aboard the sayd shipp
for his owne accompt to be transported to Embden one last of salt and the quantity of 12
hogsheads of ffrench wines, and his shipps folke have likewise
four lasts of salt and some quantity of wine aboard for their accompt but how much in
certaine he knoweth not. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth Interrogatory this deponent saith that after the lading of the
sayd last he this deponent did in the bay aforesayd by and with his owne handwriting signe
and firme three bills of lading all of one tenor for the same
and noe more, and one of them came along with the sayd salt and was and was
by this deponent delivered to the Captaine who made the seizure, and the
two other were by this deponent left in the hands of the sayd Monsieur
Vander Mede. and saith he knoweth not of any bills of lading, or
writings whatsoever aboard the sayd shipp torne burnt, throwne overboard
or any way had or concealed. and further cannot depose saving that
there were not any bills of lading for the sayd goods of this deponent and
shipps Company. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the seventh he saith he hath made two voyages to Bordeaux in ffrance
about ten yeares past. and one voyage to Nantes this last yeare but one
and 2 voyages to Rochel six or seven yeares now past, and one
voyage to Bernusse this present yeare. and saith he hath beene severall
voyages att fflushing about five or six yeares agoe, and
saith his foresayd lading of salt is to be delivered at Embden to his
foresayd owners whom he hath knowne respectively ten yeares and
upwards, and are consigned in the foresayd bill of lading to Jan Gousons
aforesayd who was and is one of the sayd Owners, whom he hath knowne
well for theis 12 yeares now past and came first acquainted with
him att Emden this deponent being an Inhabitant there and a
Marriner and the sayd Gouson a merchant of quality there likewise
dwelling. and otherwise cannot depose./

To the eighth Interrogatory he saith he was hired at Embden to sayle ithe sayd
shipp to Bornusses for a lading of salt and to returne therewith and
end the voyage att Emden, and was so hired for 150 guilders
for the whole voyage, to be payd by his foresayd Owners [?XXX] one halfe
thereof before the sayd voyage and the other halfe after the voyage is
finished. And otherwise cannot depose./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.234v Annotate
To the nynth he saith there was the Emden Colours aboard the sayd
shipp and not any other Colours and the sayd shipp was taken uppon
the open seas by one of Captaine Phillips his Capers; but whether
he had any Commission aboard [?hee] knoweth not. And otherwise
cannot depose

To the tenth he saith he was not fraighted by Charter party this voyage, but
had a Certificat touching his voyage and the same was made in the Stadthowse of Emde for the
sayd Jan Gouson Hans Lucas, Elias Duisse and Comfort Webben
and Abraham Slasse. and otherwise referring himselfe to his
said Certificat which is as he beleiveth in the Registry
of this Court he saith he cannot depose.

To the eleventh Interrogatory he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing
depositions and otherwise cannot depose saving that none of
the foresayd owners within theis 12 moneths last past have
lived in any of the dominions of the ffrench King.

To the 12th Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp made her outward
voyage aforesaid from Emden to Borousse in her ballast onely
And otherwise cannot depose

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges)

[?XXXXX] [?Gidden] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 23th of November 1653

The Keepers et cetera against the ffortune)
of Statin)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3)

Richard Batson of the parish of Saint Botolphs
Billingsgate London merchant aged 53
yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

That in or about the monethes of July August and September
last past good sweet sound and merchantable English
wheat was in this Commonwealth of England usually sold
att the rate of about nineteene and twenty shillings by the
quarter, which this deponent knoweth having about that tyme
dealt and traded in that Commodity, and more particularly saith
that within the tyme aforesayd one Mr Boreman a merchant
a partner with this deponent in the sayd trade did buy severall
great quantities of English wheat good sweet sound and merchantable
samples whereof this deponent had and saw, and is to
have a third part thereof to and for his owne accompt the sayd
whole part being 800 quarters or thereabouts, all to be safely
delivered a shipboard att the charge of the sellars, and att their
charge to be carryed from the place where the same
was bought to the Port of Kings Lyn in Norfolke where the shippe [?XXX]
lay whereon it was to be laden, att the rate of betweene nyneteene
and twenty shillings per quarter, and as this deponent remembreth
upon casting the whole up It did amount to nyneteene [?XXX]
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.235r Annotate
and six pence per quarter and not more. And saith as this deponent is
creadibly informed and beleiveth the like good sound wheat
is usually bought and sold in the marketts in Kent and other
places in England att the sayd rates of 19 s and 20 s by the
quarter. att the present. And otherwise cannot depose

upon the rest his is nor examined by direction

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

Richard Batson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before)
Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin).
----
The 24th of Novermber 1653

The Clayme of Henry Baldero English)
merchant for forty peices of Searges)
[?with mark] underwritten lately seized)
in a shipp called the Roterdam of which)
Ingelbert Vandersee was Master taken by)
a [?private] man of warr whereof [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT])
[?XX] was Commannder and by him brought)
[?XX] Suckly. Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Henry Baldero

.1.

William Cotton borne att Colchester in the
County of Essex, now liveing att Roterdam
in Holland and merchant Cashier to the sayd
Henry Baldero aged two and twenty yeares
or thereabouts, a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth

Tpo the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for many
and divers yeares last past there hath bene an English Company
of merchant Adventurers Resident in the Citty of Roterdam, and that
the arlate Henry Baldero hath bene for a yeare now past and upwrds
Treasurer of the sayd Companie of English merchants and so is att
this present, and the sayd Henry Baldero was and is an Englishman
and well affected to this Nation and the Government thereof, and that he
hath of the certaine knowledge and sight of this deponent releived many English
Seamen that have bene taken prisoners in the service of this Commonwealth in the present troubles
and hath procured the Libertyes of many of them and provided shipping
to transport them for England, All which this deponent well knoweth
being servant and Cashier to the sayd Henry Baldero, and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that in or about
the moneth of June last past the sayd Henry Baldero did buy and
provide for his owne accompt att Dunkerke in fflanders of and from Joos
Vrymonet the foresayd forty peices of English serges
for eighteene hundred guilders the first penny, and did cause

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

the same being marked and numbred as in the margent to be
laden att Dunkerke aboard the arlate shipp the Roterdam whereof the
arlate Inglebert vandersee was Master to be transported from thence
to Roterdam for the use and benefitt of him the sayd Henry Baldero
who is and ought to be the true and lawfull owner and Proprietor
thereof, the premisses he knoweth to be true for that the sayd henry
Baldero about the sayd moneth of June went from Roterdam tO Dunkerke
and att his Returne back which was after 3 or 4 dayes absence acquainted
this deponent with the price and person
of them they were bought and caused this deponent to make entryes
thereof in his bookes of Accompts which this deponent did accordingly
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.235v Annotate
His said Master being a constant coorespondent with him the
sayd Vrymendt which letters to his sayd master this deponent usually
receyves reades and answers in his masters behalfe And
saith he saw the sayd [?XXXXX] and read the same before the
sayd shipp departed from Dunkerke, And hath since seene the entry
of the sale of the sayd goods in the sayd Vyrymendts booke of
Accompts att Dunkerke, and there was present and heard the sayd
Vrymendt declare upon his oath before a Notary Publique
that the sayd serges were by him sold in manner above by this
deponent sett forth; and likewise was (as this deponent remembreth or conceyveth
that he was satisfyed for the same, or to that effect./ And moreover
saith that he this deponent about 10 or 14 dayes next after the returne
of his sayd master from Dunkerke to Rotterdam as aforesayd did receyve
and read a letter of advise from the sayd Vrymendt certifying
that he had laden the sayd goods according to the producents order for
this the producents Accompt and that in the sayd Letter there was a
bill of lading under the firme of the sayd Inglebert vabderzee
for the same. And otherwise cannot depise saving that he hath
since likewise heard the sayd vandersee acknowledge and confesse
that the sayd goods were really laden  aboard the sayd shipp in manner
and for the Accompt aforesayd.

To the third Article of  the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd
serges being the manufactures of this Commonwealth are prohibited
and not permitted to be publiquely brought into the Dominions of the
States of the Unites Provinces, and the sayd forty peices of
serges were for that cause to have bene privately and secretly
imported and conveyed to the sayd Henry Baldero and neither
to have payd any Customes or other dutyes to the sayd States of
the Unite Provinces, which he knoweth as well for that
this deponent hath severall tymes secretly conveyed said like 
goods without paying Custome for feare of having them confiscated
according to an Act of State there made in that behalfe, and have
seene and onserved that severall English mannufactures that have
bene seized have bene confiscate by vertue of the sayd Act of State
and knoweth that this parcell of English  manufacture now in question
was designed to be secretly conveyed into Roterdam, and hath heard
the foresayd Vandersee say that he had stowed the sayd stuffes in a
convenient place in the sayd shipp on purpose that they might escape the
searchers when his shipp should come into Port And otherwise he saith
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

William Cotton [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.236r Annotate
The 24th day of November 1653.

Keepers et cetera against the ffortune

Examined upon the sayd allegation

6)

Robert Bowther of Lymestreet in London
merchant aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a
witne sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To the first second third fourth fifth sixth seventh eighth nynth and
tentha rticles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith That about the month
of July last he this deponent having severall sayes seene and read an Intimation
from the Commissioners for Prize goods publiquely affixed upon the
Exchange London for and touching the sale of certayne wheat
laden aboard the arlate shipp the ffortune of Statin, by the Candle
according to the usuall and common course of intimation in that behalfe
did repaire aboard the sayd ship then lyeing neere Limehouse dock
in the River of Thames, intending to bidd money for and buy the same
upon the day of sale in case he found it a pennyworth, and saith that
being come aboard the sayd shipp he found the sayd wheat very hott
heavy musty and clotted and baked together and some of it quite spoyled
and perished, and in such a condition that in this deponents Judgement
it  would in twenty dayes longer in case it had not bene removed have
become unserviceable and unfitt for use for the most of it. And saith
that he sayd wheat was afterwards sold by the Candle by the foresayd
Comissioners on a day appoyneted for that purpose according to the
foresayd intimation, att which sale this deponent and severall other
merchants were present and bad money for it, and Mr Vincent
bidding most videlicet 19 s. 6 d by the quarter carryed it, and accordingly
the same was sold to him according to the usuall manner of sale
by the Candle, And saith the sayd Mr Vincent did give more for it
than he this deponent durst adventure to give, and did in this deponents
Judgment give more than it was really worth att that tyme according
as the marketts for Corne then went by six pence the quarter. And
saith that the Commissioners doe usually sell by the Candle their prize goods
att full valew and many tymes dearer than Merchants doe sell the
like goods att their warehouses which this deponent severall
tymes bought goods of them the sayd Commissioners by the Candle hath well seene
and observed: And further he saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. 2. and third Interrogatories he saith he cannot depose otherwise
than negtatively

To the 4th. hee saith he doth not conceyve the sayd wheat could have bene
made fitt for use or preserved from perishing otherwise then by a speedy
removeing of it out of the sayd shipp the same was in so perishing
Condition And referring to his foregoeing depositions cannot
further depose.

Robt Bowcher [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin
----
The sayd William Cotton to the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1st. he saith he was sent over by the producent from Rotterdam to looke for
restitution of the sayd goods, and is produced as a witnes by the advise of
Mr
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.236v Annotate
Mr Sukly one of the Proctors of this Court. and further to this Interrogatorie
otherwise then negatively cannot depose.

To the 2d. Interrogatory he saith he knoweth the sayd Henry Baldero and
so hath done for theis 7 yeares now last past: And saith he the sayd Baldero now liveth
in Rotterdam in Holland and there hath lived .7. yeares, of the knowledge of this
Rendent, and for some yeares before he hath heard and further
cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatory he saith the said Henry Boldero as himselfe told this
Rendent gave order by word of mouth for lading the sayd goods for his
owne Accompt to the sayd Jos Vrymont and this deponent did likewise by his the producents order in the moneth of
June aforesayd give order to the sayd Joos Vrymondt to the same
effect in a letter dated from Rotterdam in the sayd moneth of June
1653, or about that tyme. And otherwise cannot depose saving that
the sayd Vrymondt gave this Rendent an Account of the receipt of the sayd
letter and that he had laden the sayd goods according to order given
him.

To the fourth Interrogatory This deponent saith that the sayd stuffes were not
the proceed of any goods sent to the sayd Vrymondt nor payd for to him in ready
coyne by the producent but were payd for and satisfyed to him the sayd
Vrymondt in part by a bill of exchange from London remitted to
the producent payeable att Antwerpe, which bill the producent
indorsed and delivered to the sayd Vrymondt who accepted of it
as by his entry thereof in his booke of accompts which this Rendent
hath done did appeare, and partly in another bill
of exchange by the order of the sayd Vyrmondt made over by the
producent to Robert Caffart an Assigne of the sayd Vrymondt
att Amsterdam. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth Interrate This deponent saith he doth not know or
beleive in his conscience that the sayd serges or any part of them did
or doth really belong to subiects of the States of the united Provinces
or ffrenchmen subiects of the ffrench King, nor that they bore the
hazard and adventure thereof nor that in case the same had bene
lost or miscarryed the same had bene upon their Accompt. but
saith the sayd Henry Voldero did and doth runn the sole hazard
and riske therof. And otherwise cannot depose.

William Cotton [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clerke
and Doctor Godolphin.)
----
The 30th of November 1653

The keepers of the Libertie of England)
by authoritie of Parliament against the Saint Paul)
hendrick Luck master.)

Rowe dt.

1

Hendrick Luck of hamborough
Mariner, master of the said shipp aged
36 yeares or thereabouts, sworne as in the
Acts of Court and examined upon certaine
Interrogatories ministred on th ebehalfe of the State
saith and deposeth as followeth, videlicet.

To the first hee saith that about eight monethes since hee this deponent
for himselfe and other owners bought the said shipp the Saint Paul att
Lubeck (where shee was built and was then [?neare]) of one hendrick
[?Minck] a Lubecker whoe built her, and then and there tooke possession
and hath ever since bin master of her, and was master at the time
of her seizure, and saith that hee this deponent is a hamburger
borne
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.237r Annotate
borne and a subiect of that free State, and dwelleth there and soe hath done
all his time, and hath bin a maried man and a houskeeper there for theise foure
yeares last past.

To the second, third and fourth hee saith that having soe bought the said shipp
at Lubeck, hee this deponent while shee was fitting returned to hamborough
where hee was freighted by harman Reyndorp and ffrancis Sloyer two
merchants of hamborough to goe with the said shipp in ballast from Lubeck
to dronten in Norway, and there to take in her lading of deals and carry
and deliver the same at Cadiz in Spaine for their accompt, and this deponent
accordingly went from Lubeck about 6 monethes since to dronten and tooke
in his said lading of 6000 deales and carried and delivered them at Cadiz
to daniel Sloyer brother of the said ffrancis for accompt of the said
hance Reynsdorp and ffrancis Sloyer, and his company of mariners had
about 40 barrells of tarr for their accompt which they sold at Cadiz and the said [?merchants] a little of tarr, and
saith the said affreightment was made by Charter partie and that the said
two freighters were and are part owners of the said shipp, and further
that the said shipp hath not bin at any other port since her departure from
Lubeck but at dronten and Cadiz to the time of her seizure, and that
this is her first voyage , shee as aforesaid being newe, And otherwise hee
cannot depose, saving the said shipp belongeth to the port of hamborough.

To the fifth and 6th hee saith that hee was constituted master by the owners
who were and are ffrancis van Bremen and Peter van Bremen his brother 
who together are owners of halfe of the said shipp, Arnoult Van hasedonck
and hendrick Van Hasedonck his brother, who together have an eighth part
in the said shipp; Gerrit Boremaster, Albert Stockman, and Michael van
Lubkin each and every one a sixteenth part; harman Reyndorp and ffrancis Sloyer aforesaid
together a sixteenth part namely each a 32th part, Mathias hennrick
a 32th part, Joachim Martins a 32th part, and this deponent a sixteenth
part, and that they by the hands of this deponent paid tenn thousand
marks Lubecks for the said shipp, besides her rigging and fitting which cost
six thousand and two hundred marks besides, and saith his said owners were
and are all hamburgers, there borne, all burghers and Inhabitants
of that citie where they have dwelt all their times, and subiects of that
free State, and that this deponent paid the said money to hendrick [?Minck]
aforesaid a burgher of Lubeck of whom hee bought the said shipp as aforesaid.

To the seaventh and 8th hee saith that all his goods and lading of the said shipp
together with the small quanitie of silver taken in her, were laden and
received aboard in the port of Cadiz and that the said lading consisteth
in paving stones for ballast, two hundred and twenty nine baggs or thereabouts of wooll
three hundred quintalls or thereabouts of campecha wood, about 300 barrells
of figgs, 23 small chests (of five arobes or thereabouts a peece) of sugar and 6186 peeces of eight
all laden by severall free merchants and factors at Cadiz, for severall
merchants of Spaine and hamburgh, according to his bills of lading, and
consigned to severall merchants of hamburgh,
saving that a thousand of the said peeces of eight were laden by
Sivert [?Godeman] (as hee taketh his name to be) a Lubeck Skipper
who sent the same from Cadiz being for freight of his shipp and sent
to his owners, and that there is a bill of lading for the same, And
that ober and besides the said goods hee this deponent hath betwixt 30
and 40 barrells of figgs and two pipes of wine for his owne
ccompt, and his shipps company have five or six pipes of wyne
and some lemmons and it may be some few barrells of figgs for
their accompt, and saith hee knoweth the said Skipper Sivert [?Gadman]
and beleeveth hee knoweth the other persons interrogated by sight, but hath [?lesse]
acquaintance with them, and that hee carried noe goods to them, and
saith
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.237v Annotate
saith that the silver aboard was laden in the day time within command
of the fortresse of Cadiz, And othwrwise hee cannot depose, saving hee
beleeveth that by Henry Luck interrate, this deponent is intended,
being his name.

To the 9th hee saith that the bills of lading found in the said shipp for the goods were signed ashore at Cadiz and those for [?XXXX] were
as he remembreth signed aboard the said shipp
in the bay of Cadiz, and that hee signed two other bills of lading of one
tenor of each of these to [?carry] aboard, and being thre for each parcell, and
did not signe any other bills of other tenor, or more than the saud three
for each parcell, and having signed the same and as hee signed them hee
kept one by order of the lader for each parcell, and brought to the
lader or such imployed by him to bringe the goods and money aboard,
and that the said bills of lading taken in the said shipp were never
out of this deponents custodie that hee remembreth, till the sizure
thereof by the shipp of this Commonwealth, And otherwise referring
himselfe to he said bills, hee cannot depose.

To the 10th hee saith that the said bills when the said shipp ws seized
were all together in a bundle or letter case aboard, only hee beleeveth
that for the sugar bill  is in a letter
to ffrancis Sloyer to whom the same is consigned to Hamburg
and that hee knoweth not otherwise for whose accompt the
said goods and silver are than by the said vills of lading whereunto
hee referreth himselfe, saving such as are belonging to him and
company as aforesaid.

To the 11th hee saith that hee kept noe booke being a badd writer, but tooke only a little
note in a paper of the goods as they came aboard, which hee beleeveth
is amongest the papers seized, referring himselfe to the bills and
papers seized, and otherwise hee cannot depose saving the said
note is very short and not soe full of particulars as the bills
to his remembrance, and saving hee had noe Purser.

To the twelfth hee saith hee began to take in his lading about the
24th of September and ended the same in a monethes space or thereabouts
finishing on or about the 20th of October last, and that hee tooke
in his wooll at once as fast as hee could stowe, and the campecha
and figgs the like.

To the 13 and 14 hee saith hee knoweth not whether it be possible
or not to carry silver in a shipp from Spaine without license, hee
having bin at Cadiz but one before this voyagem and then taking none
at all aboard; and the quantitie aforesaid which hee hath [?XXX]
is soe small, that hee was not occasioned to informe himselfe
whether it was unlawfull to export it or not. And otherwise hee
cannot depose.

To the 15th hee saith that none of the said money belongeth to [?any]
owners of the said shippp or any of them, and that there is noe [?and ?XX ?but]
what there are bills of lading aboard for some.

To the last negatively.

[?Hinrich] [?l?insen] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clerke and Godolphon

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.238r Annotate
The first of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Libertie of England by)
authoritie of Parliament against the shipp)
[?keisars crowne], or Crowne Imperiall)
[?Hance] Meynerson master)

Rowe dt.

Hance Meynerson of hamborough Mariner
master of the said shipp the Crowne Imperiall
aged 43 yeares or thereabouts, sworne as in
the acts of Court and examined upon certaine
Interrogatories ministred on the behalfe of the State saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee this deponent hath bin
master of the said shipp the keisers crowne or crowne Imperiall ever since shee
was built namely for three yeares last, and was aboard her when shee was
seized by Captaine Blake and before boarded by the Nonsuch frigot and taken
from whome shee was parted by the darknesse of the night and
the next day met with by Captaine Blake. And saith hee was borne
in hamborogh and hath lived there all his time and was and is a burgher
and subiect of that place, and hath bin mared and kept his house and familie
there theise thirteene yeares last.

To the second, third and fourth Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that
when the said shipp was soe seized shee came from Cadiz, bound for hambourgh
the place of her dischardge, and that shee began her outwards voyage from
Hamborough about the 16th of July last and was freighted by
ffrancis Sloyer a merchant of hamborough, to goe to Cadiz and carry
barley, beanes and peece goods, which were laden by him and Peter [?Rover],
Derrick Dobbelar, Albert Ankelman, and other merchants of hamborough
laders under the said Sloyer, all which hee accordingly carried to Cadiz
for their accompts and there delivered the same to Daniel Sloyer, Vincent
van Campen, John Scrother and others factors and merchants there residing,
and that none of the said laders of hamburgh are owners of any part of the said shipp
that hee remembreth, and saith the said affreightment was  by Charter partie and that
the said shipp hath bin at noe other port since shee came from hamborough,
but Cadiz before her seizure. And further that about three yeares since
shee was built at Serdam by order and for accompt of this deponent
and company all hamburgers, and when shee was about halfe built
one of the two Shipwrights (brothers) with whom hee this deponent hath contracted for
her building, untill compelled by lawe which suite lasted neere about 6 monthes
and what with that sute and the finishing and fitting hee afterwards and
one or other interruption, it was the Springe last before hee
could get her home to hamborough, soe that this is her first voyage
since coming from Serdam to hamborough only in ballast, and comming
this voyage from hamborough off the coast of holland hee mett Captaine
Brandley with twelve shipps of this Commonwealth by whom being
visited hee was let passe, and the next day hee came into the whole
fleete of this Commonwealth, and being haled by severall of the shipps
and some of their officers sent aboard to visit him, hee was commanded
aboard Captaine Robert Clarke, wher hee was examined and his
papers [?visited] by him and Captaine Stokes, who finding him cleere
dismissed him and gave him their passe which hee leaveth for the further
information of this Court, and soe hee went cleere and uninterupted to Cadiz
and delivered as aforesaid his said outwards lading. And saith hee was
at hamborough about three monethes with the said shipp before her
proceeding thence on this voyag, and that shee belongeth to the
said port of hamborough. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.238v Annotate
To the 5th hee saith hee paid 8500 gilders for the hull of the
said shipp to the said shipwrights named Abraham and John [?HendrickXX]
Cardinall and their mother, besides her rigging and fitting, and otherwise
hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the 6th hee saith that his owners are all Hamburgers, burgers
and dwellers and natives of that citie and subiects of the free state
and for their names and respective parts hee saith that some were and
are as followeth. Videlicet Wilkin Wrede a 32th and a 40th, Lodewick
Vermeulen fower two and thritieth and a 40th parts, Otto Helmers the like, [?Tobias]
hamman two two and thirtieth and one 40th parts, diderick [?RXXX]
one 32th and one 40th, Peter Ban [?Dame] 3 32th parts, ffrancis
[?Mayack] the like, Hance Yonge 2, 32th parts, Hendrick Momma the
like, and this deponent 6 two and thirtieth parts, and otherwise
hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the seaventh hee saith that the silver and other lading seized in the
said shipp were received all aboard in the bay of Cadiz ad at now
other port, and that hee well knoweth the interrogated John Pape
Sivert Goodman and Martin Gansbergh, who were
and came aboard this deponents shipp in the said bay, and this deponent
was in theri company ashore at Cadiz, and that hee carried goods to tthe
said John Pape, and otherwise cannot depose, beleaving that
the other parties interrogated whom hee knoweth not live in Sevill, for that
most of his peece goods went thither.

To the 8th hee saith that the silver was brought aboard some by
day and therest by night in the said bay under commammd of the
fortresse, and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 9th and 10th hee saith that the bills of lading for the goods were signed [?all]
ashore at Cadiz and those for the silver were signed aboard the said shipp by this
deponent, and that hee signed three (all of one tenor) for each
parcell, and noe others, and beleeveth that hee had one of each
aboard at the time of the said seizure, all which bills and other papeprs
aboard were sent to the Captaine of the Nonsuch frigot, and
that hee this deponent delivered the other two of each to such as laded the said goods
and silver or such as were sent therewith, and that those taken
aboard were alwaies in this deponents custodie from the time of the
seizure to the time they were sent aboard the Nonsuch, at which time
of seizure they were in a bundle wrapt up together the bills for
the goods by themselves and those for the silver by themselves, and
not in letters, and that hee beleeveth the goods and siler are for [?accompt]
according to the bills of lading, namely for accompt of such as the bills mention, [?XXXX]
that hee knoweth not other then by the bills of lading for whose accompt
the same are, saving that for the most part of those [?persons]
hee carried goods to Spaine, and saving that the said [?XXXX] [?GooXXX]
is a lubeck skipper and laded a thousand peeces of eight, and [?MXXXX]
[?Gansbergh] a hamborough skipper a bagge of 450 peecves
of eight and above of silver of 34 markes, which they respectively
send to their owners as money earned by freight of their shipps
hee referrs himselfe to the said bills.

To the 12th hee saith hee began to lade in or
about September and finished in a monethes space or thereabouts
and otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his roll or particularof [?lading]
seized and brought into this Court./

To the 13 and 14th hee saith hee cannot depose, for hee was never
at Cadiz before this voyage, and soe little did hee take notice or
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.239r Annotate
thinke of any [?proportion] to lade silver, that hee carried a hundred peeces of
eight or [?oare] under his arme and through the streete and out at the gate at
Cadiz and soe went aboard.

To the 15 hee saith hee hath three thousand peeces of eight or betwixt 2500
and 3000 or thereabouts aboard for accompt of himselfe and shipps owners
being money prceeding of freight and some goods of his for which there is
noe bill of lading, nor is the same amongest the other silver, but was lying
in this deponents chest, and that this deponent hath about 40 barrells
of figgs and his mariners about 20 or 30 barrells, and hee and they
have 8 or 9 pipes of wine and 50 or 60 thousand lemmons aboard
for their owne accompt for which there is alsoe noe bill, and
for all the rest hee signed bills.

To the 16th negatively.

To the 17th hee beleeveth that the silver and other goods aboard laden for merchants accounts
are the retourne or proceede of goods caried to Cadiz in the said shipp,
saving the wooll, which is laden by another as appeareth by the dispatches
for the same, and that the same were laden by or from such to whom
hee brought the said goods from Hamburgh.

To the 18 hee saith his company at the time of seizure
consisted of 24 eaters or thereabouts, all Hamburgers, and most
of them there married or in the townes thereabouts under the same,
and came all aboard at Hamburgh, and otherwise negatively.

[?XXXX XXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clark and Colonel Cock.
----
On the behalfe of John Bushell Captaine Thomas)
[?XX] and others touching their losses by the)
King of Portugall)

Thomas Grant of London Mariner
aged 46 yeares or thereabouts sworne the
[BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT]
Judges of the high Court of the Admiralty saith and
deposeth

That in or about the moneth of July in the yeare 1650 the shipp Lamb whereof
this deponent was Captaine or Commander was by order of the Kinge of
Portugall and by his officers at the Vechia together with her ladeing of goods
seized upon and taken away and this deponent and all the English mariners turned
out of her And this deponent saith that at the tyme when the sayd shipp was
seized as aforesayd there were on board the sayd shipp all and singualar the goods
hereafter specified by the Accompt of the respective persons hereafter named That
is to say for the proper Accompt of John Bushell five chests of white sugars
for the proper Accompt of Robert Smith sixteene chests of white sugars, for the proper
Accompt of William Mackadams ffowerteene chests of white sugars For the proper
Accompt of this deponent Thomas Grant one hundred chests of white sugars, All
and singular which aforesayd goods were by the Kings Officers seized upon at the
tyme aforesayd and the Owners utterly deprives thereof and otherwise hee cannot
depose./.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.239v Annotate
The 8th of December 1653.

The claime of Hendrick Bremer and)
Martin Rademaker for the goods in the)
White Swann, Walter Johnson master)

Examined upon the allegation on the behalfe of
the said claimers

Rp.

Walter Johnson of Lubeck Mariner master of
the said shipp the White Swann aged 44 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said alleagtion hee saith and deposeth that hee
well knoweth the producents Hendrick Bremer and Martin Rademaker
and hath soe donne for theise twenty yeeres last past and upwards
and saith that in the Moneth of June last past they tooke the shipp
the White Swann arlate by freight of this deponent and company
owners thereof at Lubeck to goe thence to Riga in the East Countrey
to lade clapboards and other goods to be carried thence to Rochell
fframce for their accompt there to be sold and for their use and profit,a nd
to relade wines and salt and bringe the same to Lubeck for the accompt
aforesaid, and for the buying and providing the said lading at Riga
the said Hendrick Bremer and Martin Reade did at Lubeck deliver
unto this deponent master of the said shipp each three hundred
Rex dollars, which hee carried in the said shipp to Riga and therewith
in or about the moneth of July last bought the said lading, being
96 shocks of clapboard and sixteene shipp pounds of flax, and
laded the same aboard the said shipp in order to and persuance of
the said affreightment and departed therewith for Rochell, and that
the same were aboard at the time of the seizure of the said shipp
by Captaine Goddens. And saith that the said Hendrick
Bremer and Martin Roade were and are the true and sole owners
of the said goods and were and are Inhabitants of the towne of Lubeck
and subiects of that free State. All which hee knoweth to be true
because hee is and was master and privie and partie to all the
premisses. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the crosse Interrogatories.

Smith dt.

To the first hee saith that hee hath noe share or interest in the foresayd
lading, but hath 4 shocks of clapboard or wood aboard for his owne
accompt apart, and saith that noe hollander or other subiect of
the States of the United Netherlands have any part or interest therein
neither hath any subiect of the ffrench king any interest therein,
And otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the second hee saith that the said shipp and goods were about
twelve weekes at Ostendbefore shee was taken by the sauud [?GallXXX]
and saith that [?Lowe] [?Lit] a merchant of Dunquerke and correspondent
of the said producentrs fournished this deponent with some moneyes
as hee had made of while hee was at Ostend, and that by order
of the said Martin Roade maker who wrote to him to [?XXX]
the said Roade maker having newes by the post of the said shipp
being then before this deponent come thither, for hee saith
that comming from Riga for ffrance hee came into the English
fleete, and ws brought aboard Generall Monck, and the
fight with the dutch soone ensuing, this deponent had
noe time to come on aboard his owne shipp which was forced away
with a storme and was carried to Ostend, and afterwards this deponent being [?sett]
ashore in England went over there to her.

To the third hee saith that hee received letters from the said &lt;arin
Rode maker to hasten his voyage for ffrance, and otherwise cannot [?depose]

WOL . TER . IO . HAN . SEN [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.240r Annotate
The eighth of December 1653

On behalfe of Mr Tailor)
for hemp laden aboard)
the  [?XXXX] Ludike.)

Rp.

Humphrey Tailor of London Merchant aged 29 yeares or therabouts
and Oliver Taylor of the same citie merchant aged 27 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne before the right worshipfull William Clarke and
John Godolphin doctors of lawes.
Judges of the high Court of Admiraltie of England say
and depose by vertue of their oathes.

In or about the moneth of July last they theise deponents and Alderman
Thomas Allan of this citie and companie gave order to ffrans
Vasse merchant and burgher of Dantsike to lade aboard every fitt vessell
bound from Dantzike, Riga or Coningsbergh for London to the valewe of
foure or five hundred pounds sterling in hemp for their accompt to
be brought to this citie of London; And that the said ffrans Vasse
in persuance of
their said order freighted at dantsike the shipp the Patience of Stettin Ertman Ludike
master and sent the same to Riga, and gave oder there to John Van
Hoorn to lade hemp aboard her accordingly for the accompt aforesaid
for London, which the said John Van Hoorn did, namely 77 bundles of
hemp conteyning 232 shipp pounds and a halfe; And saith that for
prevention of taking by the Hollanders the dispatches and letters touching
the said ladeing were for as if the said lading was to be delivered
at Dunquerke to Abraham Vander Hoorne and as for accompt of him or of the
said ffrans Vosse, but in trueth and realitie they were to come
hither for this citie and for the accompt of theise deponents and company
aforesaid, but they had bin taken by the hollanders they had bin
upon the accompt of the said ffrans Vosse or of the said Vander hoove
theise deponents and companie having before hand given
satisfaction to them by way of assurance, namely the said goods were
assured by the said ffrancis Vosse and Abraham Vanderhoove or one of
them to dunquirke; and from thence to London theise deponents
and company were to run the adventure of the same. And by that
way theise deponents and company have received severall other parcells
of hemp from the East countrey, and doe expect more. And
further they depose that as they are informed a private man of warr
of this nation imployed by one mr [?leaver] of dover about a fortnight since met with the
said vessell as shee lay or was before or next Newport in fflanders
waiting for a pilate to carry her to dunquirke, and seized and
carried her and her said lading to Ostend, where the same as they
are informed are nowe remayning. And lastly they depose that the
said goods were bought and paid for with the effects of theise deponents and companie and shipt by their order and to be brought
to this port for their accompt of them and company and that
noe hollander or ffrench man or subiect of the States of the United
Netherlands or of the ffrench kinge have any interest in the said goods.

Hum: Taylor [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Oliver Taylor [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.240v Annotate
The 9th of December 1653

On the behalfe of ffrancis Cornish of)
London merchant touching a losse in the)
shipp the George of London

'Rp.'

'Robert Williams' of the parish of Saint catherines
neere the Tower of London mariner aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts sworne before the right
worshipfull William Clerke and John Godolphin doctors
of Lawes Judges of the High Court of Admiraltie
and examined upon certaine Interrogatories ministred  on
the behalfe of the said ffrancis Cornish saieth and
deposeth by vertue of his oath as followeth, videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee well knewe and
was master of the shipp the George Interrogated in her last voyage bound from
this port of London to proceede and saile to hamborough there to make
her dischardge.

To the second hee saith hee doth not knowe that the interrogated ffrancis
Cornish was any owner or part owner of the said shipp or of her tackle
and furniture at the time of her setting forth upon the said voyage
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third terrogatorie hee deposeth that the said voyage there were
laden and put aboard the said shipp at this port of London to bee
transported to hamborough for and upon the accompt of the said ffrancis
Cornish severall packs and trusses of woollen commodities
and merchandize, which hee knoweth becasue hee received the same
aboard being master of the said vessell, but the particulars or
valewe of the said goods hee knoweth not, And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the fourth Interrogatorie hee saith that the said shipp after her receiving the said goosd
aboard departed from this port of London for hamborough, and in her
course of proceeding comming within the river of Elve was
met with and taken by two men of warr belonging to Amsterdam
and boarded by one of them whereof derrick Peterson hertit was
commannder, who setting this deponent ashore carried the said  shipp
and lading to Amsterdam and there made prize of the
same, and this taking and seizure hee saith was on the fourth day
of Aprill last past newe stile, and saith that the said goods and
merchandize soe laden by the said ffrancis Cornish were then aboard her
and were [?XXX] and carried away in the said shipp George, and soe were
and are utterly lost into him without any satisfaction, and the shipp
and rest of the goods were and are alsoe lost to the owners thereof, all
which hee knoweth being master as aforesaud and aboard at the time
of the said seizure.

Robert Williams [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges in Court.
----
The tenth of December 1653

Captaine Phillips and company against the)
shipp the Greene Dragon and goods in the same)

Examined upon and allegation made in the acts
of Court the 9th present on the behalfe
of the claimers.

1

Thyse Matthias Groen of Lubeck Mariner
Stiersman of the said shipp the greene Dragon aged
30 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth that on the exth or seventh
of this instant december (newe stile) this deponent stiersman of the [?sayd]
shipp the Greene dragon having notice from and by mr de hose of [?XXX]
that hee had received an order from this Court whereby Captaone [?XXXXX]
[?wXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.241r Annotate
was ordered to [?permit] this deponent and the rest of the said shipps company to goe aboard
the said shipp for their dyet and lodging or els provide for them ashore at his costs
and that hee the said mr de hose had showed the same to the said Captaine Phillips
or had made hom acquainted therewith, went to the said Captaine accompanied
with two others of the said shipps company to the house of mr dela val at dover
and desired him that hee in obsedience to the said order would tell let them goe
aboard or provide for them, whereupon the said Captaine told them that they
should that day goe aboard, and accordingly in the afternoone hee tooke them
aboard with him, and permitted them to take every of them a cleane shirt
and that being donne and hee taking all the keyes with him carried them
againe ashore with him, without suffering them to eate or drinke and soe
turned them off. And the next day they went againe to him to the said
house and humbly bespake him to the effect aforesaid, having to that time
received noe maintenace or satisffaction from him, and the said Captaine Phillips
then asked them if 6 d a day would serve them for each of them, and this
deponent answering that they could not have lodging and diet ashore at soe
lowe a rate, and therefore besought him that in regard they had provision
enough aboard, and that it would spoile, they might goe aboard to lodge
and diet, whereupon dela val being present said they should have
8 d a day a peece and that Captaine Phillips should pay it them if 6 d
a day were not enough, and this deponent replying that lodging and diet
being there ery deere, they could not be maintained therewith, the
said Captaine Phillips left them and departed in distast and would not
suffer them afterwards to approach and speake to him though they often
endeavoured it, soe that they were forced to get dyet and lodging as they could
with much a doe at their owne provision, and this deponent to undertake
and secure the payment therefore at severall victualling houses, into one
of which the Purser of the man of warr that tooke them, comming,
said to the woman of the house, whie entertaine you theise people, they
have noe money, and you will not be paid a farthing for them, or to that
effect, upon which the woman turned them out a doors to looke for
newe lodging, which this deponent ws faine to provide them,
and soe they could get not dyet or dodging from or by meanes of the
said Captaine Phillips.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and otherwise
cannot depose, saving hee well knoweth Captaine Phillips and
sawe him yesterday in the Court, and besides the times that hee went
to him as aforesaid, hee sawe him severall times in dover, and lastly there
on or about wednesday was seavenight last.

To the second hee saith that hee hath bin 5 or 6 times in England, yet
can speake noe English nor understand but little, and that one of his
company bespake the said Captaine in ffrench, and Mr de
la Val spake dutch unto them.

To the 3 hee saith there went a notary with them to the said Captaine
who carried a box under his arme, which hee said was the said order [?monnition]
or Commission, and otherwise negatively, and cannot depose.

To the 4 gee saith that the Captaine of the man of warr turned the Greene
dragons company ashore at Dover after and upon the said seizure, at
which Captaine Phillips was not present, and that hee knoweth noe
cause the said Captaine had therefore, and otherwise negatively.

To the last negatively saving as aforesaid.

[?XXXX XXXony] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.241v Annotate
The 12th of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Mr Alderman ffrederick)
touching goods exported from)
the East countrey)

'John ffrederick' Alderman of the citie of London
sworne before the right worshipfull William Clerke and
John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie, saith and
deposeth by vertue of his oath.

That a certaine shipp of the burthen of 100 lasts or thereabouts
Whereof Joachim Beck is master, laden with iron, cordage, hemp
cable yarene, deales, sparrs and tarr is bound from Hamburgh for
Dartmouth and that the said goods are for the proper account of this deponent and company one third
John Lowering of Weare in Devonshire one third; and that for feare of the
Dutch or ffrench man of warr, the bills of lading and letters of
consignment that foe with the shipp are (as hee is advised by letters
from their factor at hamborough ) and as hee verily beleeveth)
made as consigned to Bourdeaux to Mr John van Poulle for account
of George Roze[?e] of Nants, whereas in truth and realitie the ssaid
goods were bought with the proper effects of this deponent and of the
said John Lowering and Laurence Wheeler and company remayning
at hamburgh in the hands of their factor there, and that noe
subiect of the States of the United Netherlands or of the ffrench king
hath any interest therein, but the said shipp was to
goe and dischardge at Dartmouth for the accompt aforesaid.

John frederick [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

And on the third of January 1653 the said Mr Alderman ffrederick againe
appeared and and averred that by further advise from the said factor hee is informed
that the said consignment and dispatches for the said shipp and goods are now made
for Rochell per forma, namely consigned thither to [?Auger da Chaim] for account of the said [?Rozge]
----
The 15th of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Chilston against the Greate Christofer)
and against John ffatzbergh and others.)

Examined upon the allegation on the behalfe of
the said ffaltzbergh and others given in
december 1653.

dt.

1

Joachim Wise of Stettin Carpenter of the said
shipp the greate Christofer aged 44 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith as followeth.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that  [?XXX]
after the seizure of the said shipp the greate Christofer and her [?bringing]
to Blackwell about eleaven weekes aince, the Lieutenant
of the Prosperous and company sent for the Stiersman of the said shipp
the greate Christofer ashore at Blackwell, whom they beate and
abused (as the said stiersman said) and then sent him againe
aboard and caused this deponent to be brought ashore to them in a
victualling house, where the said Lieutenant dealt with him to say and
acknowledge that the said shipp and goods were bound for holland [?or]
ffrance, and proffered him money if hee would soe say, and saidthat
this deponents wife and children  might live well of two hundred gilders
and soe much the said Lieutenant told this deponent that hee [?should]
have if hee would say that the said shipp and goods were bound for
holland or ffrance, and that noe body [?noe] [?not] the [?catt] that was taken in the [?XXXXX]
should knowe thereof, or to that effect, but this deponent [?XX]
it and told him (as the truth was) that the said shipp was bound for[?dunkerque]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.242r Annotate
dunquirke and that hee could not otherwise depose though hee could guve him the
said shipps lading of gold. or to the same effect. And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the second article hee saith and deposeth that the Cooke of the said shipp the
greate Christopher commonly named and called Nellis or Cornelius (who as this
deponent hath bin informed hath in this Court bib examined against the said shipp)
was and is a poore, indigent, worthlesse fellowe, and one that was bought
by Michael Crager master of the said shipp at Riga of and from the Captaine
of a companie of souldiers there in the service of the Queene of Sweden for
nine dollars or thereabouts, about two or three dayes before the said shipps
comming thence [?on] the voyage in question, and when the said master soe bought
him hee the said Nelis was in a very miserable and base condition, and soe hee
was, when hee came here ashore at the time when (as is said) hee
was examined, and had not a short to his back, but was lowsie and
nastie for want of a short; And this deponent taketh and conceiveth
him to be a person soe slight and loose, that for a small reqard
hee might be induced to say ad sweare any thinge, and saith that if hee [?have] sworne
that the said shipp was bound for holland or that the goods belonged to hollanders
hee hath therein deposed contrary to the truth, and for a slight person
and one that may be induced as aforesaid to say any thinge for reward
hee was and is say the company of the said shipp commonly accompted
and reputed. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith that the Lieutenant of the said shipp Prosperous was and
is named Mowey or Mowet or some such name, for soe this deponent
hath often heard him called.

To the second hee saith that there were some others present with the said
Lieutenant when hee had soe dealt with this deponent and endeavoured to
corrupt him with money as aforesaid, whom this deponent tooke to be
some of his imployers, and that this deponent hath not bin before
examined, and otherwise saving his foregoing deposition, saying hee
was Carpenter of the said shipp.

To the fourth hee saith that the said Nellis was Cooke of the said shipp
and this deponent did not see any money or regard given him, and
otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

Repeated before doctor Clarke.

'M  I' [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The 23th of December 1653

The claime of Antonio de Cuyper merchant)
of Dantzike for his goods in the Saint Peter (Joachim)
[?Kint] Master

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the said Antonio de
Cuyper given 29th November 1653.

2

Joachim kint master of the said shipp aged 40 yeeres or thereabouts sworne

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
hee well knoweth the arlate Antonio de Cuyper, and saith that hee  the
said de Cuyper was the time arlate and is the true and lawfull owner and
proprietor of twelve pacjes contayning fourteene shipp pounds
and a halfe of good drie wax marked as in the margent and numbred as
is arlate, and for such commonly accompted and reputed,
And
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.243r Annotate
To the second hee saith the said Antonio de Cuyper was present at Dantzike
at the lading of the said goods, where this deponent saw and spake with him
thereabouts. And otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the third hee saith that hee was freighted at Roane by Lewes de [?Sarandie]
for accompt of hance hendrickson Overbeke of hamburgh to goe to dantzike
and take no goods this voyage and bring the same to Roane, where this deponent
was to receive his freight of the said Lewes, and saith hee this
deponent as master had some tonnage by privilege of his said mastershipp
reserved by himselfe, upon which hee tooke in the said wax, the freight of
which hee was himselfe to have./

To the fowerth hee saith hee never read the letter or Invoice interrate,
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the last hee cannot answer saving as aforesaid.

Jochim king [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctors Clerke and Godolphin.

[REST OF MANUSCRIPT PAGE IS BLANK]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.243v Annotate
[BLANK MANUSCROIPT PAGE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.244r Annotate
C.C.C.

The 24th of November 1653

The Keepers of the Libertie of)
England by authoritie of Parliament)
against the Hope, Marine Marinson Master.)

Rowe dt.

Marin Marinson of hamborough
Mariner, master of the said shipp the
hope, aged 46 yeares or thereabouts sworne
as in the acts of Court and examined
upon certaine Interrogatories ministred on the
behalfe of the Common wealth, saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee hath bin master
of the said shipp the hope for theise six yeares last past, during which space
shee hath belonged to the port of hamburgh, where this deponent first
came aboard her, and where hee was borne and hath dwellt all
his time, and hath bin maried and kept house and family there for
theise twenty yeares last past and upwards./

To the second, third and fourth Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that
the said shipp the hope when shee was seized was bound and going for
hamborough the place of her designed deliverie, and came from Malaga
about seaven weekes since laden with about 150 fatts of wine and raisins
by severall merchants and factors at the said port of Malaga
referring himselfe for their names and for the more particularitie of his
Lading to his papers and bills seized in the said shipp, and brought as
hee beleeveth into this Court as alsoe for whose accompt and to
whom to be delivered. And saith the said shipp began her outwards
voyage from hamburgh about fower monthes since bound for Malaga
laden with pipe staves, and some piece goods by Mr [?Rate], Mr Wolfe
Michaell English and other hamburgers, which were delivered at Malaga
by this deponent to the marchants and factors there to whom the same
were conisgned namely Simon Melfort, George Roole Mr
Alders and Brandt and others most or all of them
hamburgers and of other places of high Germany; And that the
said outwards lading was for the accompt of the shipps owners and other
Marchants all hamburgers and dwelling in hamburgh, by whom
the shipp was freighted by Charter partie, and further that the said shipp
hath bin in noe other port since her departure from hamburgh to the
time of her seizure but Mallaga, saving in her outwards proceeding shee
came into the fleete of this Commonwealth before the Texel, by
whom after declaration of her designe and whence shee was, shee was
dismissed with other hamburgers with a passe or certificate from the said
fleete; And lastly that the said shipp in the next voyage before this past
proceeding from hamburgh for Nantes was brought into Portsmouth
by one of the shipps of this State, and released by authoritie of this
State, and  thence went and fetched her lading of wine and delivered
the same to hamborough to a merchant there, and after shee had staid about
six weekes at home shee departed on this present voyage. And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fifth and 6 hee saith hee was constituted master by his owners, and that
one Joachim Westphalia a hamburger was master next before this deponent
and this deponent bought her for accompt of himselfe and part owners
of the said Joachim Westphalia, and saith shee was
built at Lubeck and that this deponent paid 6500 marks Lubecks for
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.244v Annotate
the said shipp and hath an eighth part of her, and that Michall English
harman Barans, derricke dobbelaer, daniel [?Clayas]. [?Christofer]
harbergh. Gabergel English, derrick English and hendrick [?vande ?kreutz]
hamburgers were and are the rest of his owners, and saith the said [?former]
skipper was not aboard at the time of the seizure, but this deponent
was then sole master of her, and hath soe bin ever since hee hath had the
said shipp as aforesaid. And further that the said Michall English had
two eighth oarts in the said shipp, harman Barens, daniel [?Clayes] [?XXX]
English each an eight part, and this deponent an eighth part, derrick [?dobbelaer]
a 16th, Christofer harbergh a 16th part, derrick English a 16thy
hendrick vande kreutz a 16th part, and that they were and are all
Natives and Inhabitants of hamburgh and subiects of that free state
And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the 8th hee saith that the said shipps company consisteth of
fourteen eaters, all Hamburgers and Easterlings and came all
aboard at Hamburgh, and otherwise negatively.

To the 9th hee saith there are bills of lading for all the fgoods save
those belonging to this deponent and his company before [?expressed]

To the last hee saith hee hath knowne the said factors thatladed the
said goods for six or seaven ueares last, during which space hee
hath used the trade of Malaga, and saith that by the word[?s] [?XXX]
mentioned in his examination at Plymouth, hee spake of and [?meant]
high dutch and hamburgers, and not any subiect of the States of
the United Netherlands

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.245r Annotate
On the behalfe of Ambrose)
Pomeroy touching a lighter)
damnified by a hull mann)

Rp.

John Burr of the parish of Allhallowes Barking Waterman
servant to  Humphrey Davies waterman, aged 23 yeares or thereabouts
sworne in Court before the three Judges saith and deposeth as
followeth:

That a shipp of Hull wherof the name of the Master is Mr Perry, but the
name of the vessell hee knoweth not heaving off from Porters key neare
the Custome house about a moneth since, came fowle of a close lighter
laden with hemp named the Margaret belonging to Ambrose Pomrey lying at the said key
aboard the which lighter there was a dutchman to looke to and keepe her
fast, who having his anchor downe, the masters mate of the said hull
shipp called out to him to let his cable goe, which the said dutchman
not willing to doe least his lighter should be runn upon the bridge, the
said masters mate being in the boate of the said shipp catched hold on the said
cable and pulled the same, and bidd the dutch man who held it
aboard lett it goe; whereupon the said dutchman letting the cable goe, the
said masters hawled it out, soe that the said Lighter ran upon the bridge
and sate upon the starlins or bottome of the arch
in a very dangerous condition, wherby hee verily beleeveth shee receied
dammadge, which hee deposeth and knoweth because hee was close by the
said lighter in his boate and sawe the premisses soe donne.

John Burr [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 6th day of December 1653.

A matter Of Examination of witnesses to the)
perpetuall remembrance heereof on the part and)
behalfe of Thomas Smith against 1/16th part of the)
ship the Hamborough Merchant belonging to)
John Glinne and against the said John Glyn in)
particular and all others in generall)
smith.]

Examined upon the Allegation given on the bahalfe of
the said Smith.

dt.

j.us/

Henry Smith of the parish Of Saint
Mary Alderman Bury London Merchant aged 30
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined
deposeth.-

To the first and second articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth That
in the yeares of our Lord 1650 and 1651 the arlate John Glynne (a aperson
well knowne to this deponent for and by the space of these tenne or twelve yeares
last past) was the ffactor or Agent of the producent Thomas Smith)
of this Citty of London att Hamborough where he did act and doe his busines
for him the said producent as his factor. And saith that both before and within
the said tyme hee the said Thomas Smith did at severall tymes send
over unto the said John Glynne att Hamborough diverse Woollen Clothes
and other goods wares and merchandizes there vendible to the vallew of 5000 li
sterling and upwards there to bee by him the said Glinne sould and bartered away
for the use and advantage of him the said producent, the returnes whereof hee
was to have made to him the said producent againe, which said Woollen
Cloaths had other goods hee the said Glynne accordingly received and undertooke
to dispose of the same and make returnes thereof accordingly, Howbeit hee saith the said John Glynne
to this tyme (of this deponents knowledge) hath not made according as by
contracte
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.245v Annotate
Contracte hee was and is obliged) made a full returne to the producent of [?XXX]
son his said goods, but for and dureing all the tyme allegate hath bin and
at this present is (as hee well beleeveth) indebted unto the said Thomas Smith in ye somm of
one Thousand pounds sterling and upwards. All which hee knoweth hee this deponent
for and dureing all ye time predeposed liveing with the producent and in his imployment
noth here and at Hamborough doeth very well knowe of the sending of every particular
piece of goods by the producent to ye sayd Glynne and ye vallewe thereof and [?XXX]the sayd Glinnes receipt of the same haveing bin at Hamborough and perused his bookes
doeth finde his receipt thereof entred therein and hath for all ye tyme [?XXX]
bin very well acquainted with the dealings and transactions in ye way of mmerchandizing
which hath bin betwixt the producent and ye said Glynne untill such tyme as

[ADD DATA]
----
dt.

2dus

Thomas Smith the younger of Saint Mary Aldermanbury
London Merchant aged 29 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
Examined deposeth.-.

To the first and second articles of the Allegation given in this cause hee sayeth and
deposeth That within and for all the tyme Allegate the arlate John Glyn
(a person well knowne to this deponent by the space of these tenne yeares
last past and upwards) was the factor and Agent of and for the producent
Thomas Smith, att Hamborough, where hee did act and doe all the
Merchandizeing affaires of and for for him the said producent as his Agent and factor
And saith that within the said tyme allegate and before, hee the said
Thomas Smith the producent did send from hence unto the said John
Glyn at Hamborough diverse woollen cloths and other goods and [?Merchandizes]
to the vallewe of 5000 li. Sterling and upwards there to bee by him  [?XXX]
[?Glinne] sold and bartered away for the use and benefitt of him the said
producent to whom hee was by contract obliged to make returne [?thereof]
againe to this Citty or else where according to the producents order, [?of ?the]
said Woollen Cloaths and other goods hee the said Glynne accordingly
receaved and by severall letters under his hand which this deponent hath ssene
acknowledged the receipt thereof and engaged to make full returnes accordingly
which to this day as hee saith hee hath not done, but still was and is
indebted unto the producent Thomas Smith in the somm of 1000 li
sterling [?XXX ?XXX ?XXX] which hee by agreement was and is obliged to make good
to the said producent. All which hee knoweth to bee true, becasue hee this deponent
liveing for all the tyme allegate with the producent whose sonne hee is [?XXX]
all or most part of the said Cloaths and other goods soe sent from hence to
(the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.246r Annotate
the said John Glynne and hath allsoe seene his the said
Glynnes Letters acknowledgeing the receipt of the same Besides being
Leadger booke keaper of and for the producent doth finde the said goods
soe sent therein entred and thereby cometh to bee familiarly acquainted
with what hath pas[?X]ed betwixt the said producent and the said Glyn in the way
of Merchandizeing untill such tyme as the said Glynne failed which hee
saith was as he remembreth about the moneth of Aprill 1651. And
further cannot depose.

To the 3d. article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth That within the
tyme allegate the said John Glynne was comonly and generally accompted
and reputed the true and lawfull Owner and proprietor of one 16th
part of the shippe je Hamborough Merchant arlate and soe
much was and is true and notorious in or about this Citty and the Citty of
Hamborough where the said Glyn is knowne. And further cannot
depose.

To the last hee saith his foregoeing deposition is true

Thomas Smith Junior, [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before doctor Clerke and doctor Godolphin/
----
The nineth of December 1653.

On the behalfe of Mr Tailor)
for his hemp laden aboard)
John Mayer)

Rp.

Humphrey Taylor of London merchant aged 29 yeares or
thereabouts and 'Oliver Taylor' of the same citie merchant
aged 27 yeares or therabouts sworne before the right worshipfull
William Clerke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie doe Intimate and
say by vertue of their oathes.

That they about two monethes since gave order to their factors and correspondents
at hamborough to cause to be laden aboard any shipp comming from the
East countrey for London to the valew of 4 or 5 hundred pound sterling in hemp
for accompt of them and Alderman Thomas Allen and company, and that
they have received advise from and of the said factors that there is laden
for their accompt at hamborough aboard a shipp whereof John
Mayer is master burthen 100 lasts and mounted with 6 guns 68 bundles
contayning 204 shipp pounds of hemp and a parcell of iron for ballast,
and that for preventing taking by the hollanders or shipps of the
United Netherlands her dispatches should be made and taken for Cadiz
in Spaine or dunquirke in fflanders and (pro forma) consigne to
John dormion at Cadiz or John Augustin at dunquirke; But
they say and depose that in truth and realitie the said goods were
truely and really bought and paid for with the effects of them theise
deponents and company all merchants of London and laden for their proper
acoompt, and are really and truely intended for this port here to be
dischardged for their accompt, And that noe hollander or ffrench
man or Subiect of the States of the United Netherlands or of the
ffrench kinge have any interest whatsoever therein.

Hum: Taylor [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Oli: Taylor [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.246v Annotate
The tenth of December 1653

On the behalfe of Mr)
fford touchinge goods)
[?expected] from the East countrey.)

Richard fford of the citie of London Marchant aged 40 yeares or
thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull William Clerke
and John Godolphin doctors of Lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie saith and
intimateth by vertue of his oath

That according to his letters of advise received from Hamborough of the
sate of 29 November 1653 old stile there are laden aboard the Peter of
Hamborough, Errick Jacobson master burthen 130 lasts at the said port
of Hamborough by Hance [?Schatueland] consigned per forma to Rochell
8 packs of linnens marked and numbred as in the margin, and alsoe
aboard a shipp of hamborough John Mayer master burthen 100 lasts
and manned with 6 guns 17 packs of linnens, of the same
marke and numbred as in the margin, and 4000 matts, which last goods
aboard John Meyer are pro forma consigned to Cadiz, and saith that
in truth and realitie the said goods doe belong to this deponent
and consorts English merchants, and were bought and paid for with [?English]
effects by John Bancks their factor att Hamborough, and doe [?come] for
the sole accompt and adventure of the said Richard fford and company
bound for this port of London here to be dischardged, and that the said
consignements and dispatches for Rochell and Cadiz were and are
meerly for the preservation of the said goods from seizure by the dutch
and that noe subiect of the States of the United Netherlands
or of the ffrench Kinge have any interest whatsoever therein
And in further confirmation of the premisses hee showeth his said letter
of advise, which hee saith by vertue of his said oath hee received by
last post from Hamburgh.

Richard ford [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 10th of December 1653.

On the behalfe of Richard Wynne)
touching goods departed from the)
East countrey)

Richard Wynne of London Merchant aged 44 yeares or
thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull William
Clerke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie saith
deposeth and intimateth by vertue of his oath

That according to his letters of advise received from hambrough of the date
of the 29 of November 1653 old stile, there are laden aboard the Peter
of hamborough Erik Jacobson master burthen 130 lasts at the [?said]
port of hamborough by hance Schemel and consigned pro forma
to Rochell five pacjs of linnen marked and nombred as in the margent
and alsoe aboard a shipp of hamborough John Mayer master burthen
100 lasts and mounted with 6 gunns, six packs of linnen of the
same marke and nombred as in the margin, and alsoe two barrells of
[?shaven] [?lattin] the markes and nombers whereof, hee hath not yet [?received]
advise of, Which last goods aboard John Mayer are pro forma consigned
to Cadiz. And saith that in truth and realitie the said goods are
all belonging to this deponent, and were bought and paid for at ham[?borough]
by Thomas Bennet this deponents servant there resident with this
deponents effects, and doe come for this deponents sole accompt and
adventure bound for this port here to be dischardged, and that the said
correspondents and dispatches for Rochell and Cadiz were and are made
meerly to preserve the said goods from being seized by the dutch, and [?XXX]
subiect of the States of the United Netherlands or of the ffrench king had
any interes in the said goods.

Rich. Wynne/ [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.247r Annotate
The twelveth of December 1653.

On behalfe of the State)

Row dt.

George Richards aged 23 yeares or thereabouts,
and John Billy, aged 20 yeares
or thereabouts, both lately of the company of the Nightingale
frigot, Captaine Jacob Reynolds commannder sworne before
the right Worshipfull William Clerke doctor of lawes and
Charles George Cock Esquire, Judges of the high Court
of the Admiraltie, say and depose by vertue of their oathes.

That the said Captaine Reynolds and company in the said frigot in the
immediate service of this Commonwealth in or about the moneth of August
1652 were off Gravelinge met with and tooke a vessell of the burthen
of betweene 3 and 400 tonnes or thereabouts with 29 or 30 men named the ffort of Rochell
a man of warr belonging to Rochell, bound with provisions for the releife
of dunquirke; and sent her for dover; and say that the said prize
was alone taken by the said Captaine and company in the Nightingale friggot
and that there was noe other shipp whatsoever  in company of or in consortshipp with the said frigot
or otherwise present or assisting to the said seizure, or giving chace
to the said prize, butonly the said frigot, which alone tooke the said prize

George Richds [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

John Bylley [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 12th of december 1653.

[?XXX] and company against the Yonge bore)

Examined upon the Interrogatories in preparatorio annexed
to a Commission.

2

Hendrick Johnson of Embden mariner, master of a shipp
of that port named the Love, aged 54 yeares or threabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee well knoweth
the shipp the yonge Bore interrogated, and hath soe donne for theise six
yeeres last past or thereabouts, during which space shee hath belonged to the said
port of Embden, in East freezland, and that her owners are the Greenland
company of Embden, and have for the most part imployed her in the
Greenland voyage, and were and are dwellers in and subiects of Embden
under the Earle of East freezland, and by name were and are
Elias duÿfe, John Gansons, Comfort Webben, jance Lucas, Martin
Wolcke, Abraham Slosse, John harms, [?Jacos] Symonds, the widowe of
henrick van Ruÿle, [?hener] helling, and heinrick Gyrrards, which hee
knoweth because hee this deponent is a Skipper of the same port, and hath
seene and taken notice that they have from time to time sett her out as sowners
thereof, and they being the Greenland company of Embden hee the better
remembreth their names, but of what part each man is owner or where
shee was built hee saith this deponent knoweth not, nor sawe hee any money
paid therefore, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith that hee well knoweth the master of the said shipp
the yonge Bore harman haddiker to be an Embdener and there dwellinge
and to be a native of Morden neare unto and under the dominion of Embden
and saith the Stiersman is alsoe an Embdener and there Inhabitant and soe
is this deponent, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fourth hee saith the said owners have alwaies lived in Embden, and not elswhere
which hee knoweth having alsoe lived there all his time, and otherwise cannot
depose, saving none of the said owners are subiects of the States of the United Netherlands or of
the ffrench king

To the 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12 hee cannot depose otherwise then as aforesaid not being in the
said voyage in question nor knowing ought thereof.

hindrick Yonson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.247v Annotate
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid Interrogatories

3.

Peter Epping of Embden Mariner master of the ship the Golden
Starr of that port aged 46 yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that for theise [?XXXX]
yeares last hee hath well knowen the shipp the Yonge bore (harman [?hXXX]
master) during which space shee hath belonged to the port of Embden in
East friesland, and hath sailed out and in thence and thither for all that time
of this deponents sight and knowledge, hee being an Inhabitant and
Skipper of Embden and having dwelt there all his time, and by that
meanes hee alsoe knoweth that Burgomaster henrick H[?XXXXX]. [?XXX]
[?duif], John Gossons, Consart Webben, hance Lucous, martin [?WrXXX]
Abraham [?Glasse], John harmansson, and others all Inhabitants and
subiects of Embden were and are her owners and have imployed her
five or sixe voyages for Greenland, they the said owners being  the Greenland
company of Embden, but where the said shipp was built, or of what part
each man is owner hee knoweth not, nor sawe any money paid for
the same.

To the third and fourth hee saith the said harman haddike liveth in Embden and hath soe
donne about tenn ueares, and soe have the said owners all of them lived there about
tenn yeares last, and that the said Skipper harman haddike was borne
on Norden in the ladn and Jurisdicion of Embden, and saith hee this
deponent was borne and hath lived in Embden all his time, and that
the said owners [?or] any of them were not nor are subiects of the states
of holland or kinge of ffrance.

[MARKE] [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before/
doctor Clerke and doctor Godolphin./
----
The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid Interrogatoriess.

4.

Peter Harman of Embden Mariner aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first, second, third and fourth Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth
that the shipp the yonge Bore (which hee hath knowne for theise
six yeares last past) hath belonged and doth at present belonge to Embden
and that her owners are all Inhabitants of that place and subiects of
that free State and soe have bin above tenn yeares last past, and they
are the more generally knowne, because they are the Greenland company
of that towne, and have from time to time of his sight and knowledge
till this last voyage set out and imployed her in Greenland voyages
under the conduct of herman haddikes her master, who is alsoe an
Inhabitant and Subiect of Embden and hath bin a maried man there
about tenn yeeres and was borne at Norden under the Juriscition of that
said towne, and that the Stiersman was [?XXXX] alsoe an Embdener
but hee doth not knowe the rest of the shipps company, And for the rest
of the said owners hee saith the same were and are John Gossons,
henrick Gerrard, Martin Woulx, Comfort Webben, Abraham [?XXX]
Jacob Symonds John harmans, the widowe of hendrick Von [?Ruyle] and [?XXX]
[?helling] and [?Elias] [?deuf], and beleeveth that noe hollander of ffrenchman
hath any interes therein, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the rest hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid, not being on the voyage nor [?XXX]
knowing ought thereof.

[Peter] [?hermXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.248r Annotate
The 14th of December 1653.

On the behalfe of the State
[?Silver ] dt.

The 14th of December 1653

Thomas Alderman of Redriff in the County of Surry
Mariner aged 53 yeares or thereabouts sworne before the
right worshipfull William Clerke and John Godolphin doctors
of Lawes Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath

That after the seizure of the shipp the Prophet Elias by Captaine
Mynns in the Elizabeth frigot in the service of this Commonwealth
(which seizure happened about 11 weekes since) namely the same night
after the said seizure the master and three of the company of the Prophet
Elias being by the said Captaines commannd come aboard the said frigot and
there examined, the said master in this deponents presence told the said
Captaine Minnes that that were but five men then aboard his the said
shipp the Prophet Elias (hee the said master and three of his company
as aforesaid being aboard the frigot) and saith that the said Captaine sent
this deponent and six more of the frigots company that night aboard the
said shipp Prophet Elias, where thet found tenn sea men (all of the
said shipps company) and three Jewes, whereupon this deponent
made saile with the Prophet Elias to the said frigot, and complained
to his said Captaine, acquainting him howe many men there were
aboard the said shipp, notwithstanding that the master (who with his
other three men were still aboard the frigot) had said that there were
but five aboard, which things when the Captaine understood
hee commannded this deponent to keepe close by him all night with
the said shipp for feare of the worst, which hee did,
and that night the said three Jewes
got this deponent three times into the greate cabbin and endeavoured
to plie him with stronge waters to overcome him, but hee tooke but
one cup suspecting the worst, and stilll they were questioning him
concerning the said shipp and goods what hee thought would become
of them, and this deponent tould them they would be prize if they
were found to be fflemish, and one of the said Jewes asked this deponent
concerning his owne goods, and this deponent tould him that his goods
would be prize before any goods in the shippe; And the next day
they came into the downes, where this deponent caused him the said
Jew to open his truncke then soe this deponent might search for writigs
which the said Jew did, and there this deponent found many writings,
some of which the said Jewe and another Jew  much desired to have
againe, and this deponent refusing, they offered him two hundred
dollars to let them habe them, one of them chinking money in his
hand to tempt this deponent and gave him one dollar in part, and
saith that a yonge man that nowe pretends himselfe to be a servant
to the said Jewe was a shoemaker and told this deponent that hee
had one writing amongest the said writings which this deponent had
which hee said was a testimony that hee had served out his time
to a shoe maker in Hamborough, and this deponent taking pittie
of him, carried him aboard the frigot, to see (if those writings
were not sent ashore) that hee might looke for his owne, but
they were sent ashore before their comming aboard. And further
saith that as this deponent was searching in the said truncke for
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.249r Annotate
And further saith that after hee had order to bringe the said shipp the
Prophet Elias to London (with the rest taken in her company) his
this deponents said Captaine sent the three men of the Elias her
company that were aboard the frigot, aboard the said shipp the
Prophet Elias, expectivng that this deponent and company should
have had their help to bring up the said shipp, but after their comming
aboard, they looked upon the same to see howe the winde was, which
was then at Nore-Nore-West, after they had soe seene howe
the winde was, the Jew was confederating with
them which way to run away with the shipp, [?soe] the men declaring
to the Jew that the three Jewes who were in the cabbin, should
destroy this deponent in the night in the greate cabbin and cutt
cables in the hawse, and they would doe well enough to make away
with the rest of the company and soe run away with the shipp, it
being a fitting night for such an oportunitie, there being a fresh
gale, and darke, and said, what neede they care to doe it,
seeing the shipp went wondrous well; whereupon one of this
deponents company, having the lingua as perfect as themselves
and over heard what they said, came presently and called this
deponent unto the forecastle, and declared their designe unto
him, and thereupon the prize master of dover comming by
in the downes in the Captaines Skiffe to goe ashore, this deponent
and all the rest of his company aboard the said shipp the Prophet
Elias called out to him to come aboard, which the three dutch men
that soe were come from aboard the frigot hearing, one of
them ran downe betweene decks and hidd himselfe in a drie fatt,
And that after the said prize master came aboard, this deponent and
company all sesired him to take the thre dutch men that came
from aboard the frigot, the Jew and the Stiersman and carry them
with him ashore, for that they had confederated to run away with
the shipp that night; whereupon the prize master calling for
them all to come into the boate, the Jew was very backward
in comming, but after hee was in, and they missing the man that
was run downe betwixt decks, and searched the shipp
for him, and were almost halfe an houre before they could find
him, and finding him in the drie fatt, they pulled him out by the
heeles, and afterwards it was as much as three of them could doe
to get him over the wast into the boate, and from that time
there was peace and quietnesse in the shipp, but the prize master
of dover, being sear full, sent some souldiers aboard, and two
sea men with a pilot, for securitie of carrying up the shipp, because
of the said disturbance that had before happened

Thomas [?Alderman] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clarke and Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.249v Annotate
The 17th day of December 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

[?Chelston] against the shipp the great Christopher)
and against John ffalzbergh and others. Smith Suckley)

Examined upon the sayd Allegation

2.us

John Pruyse of Riga in Liefland [?Merchant]
aged 40. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne
and examined/

To the first article hee saith hee cannot depose otherwise then by the relation of
the arlate Joachim Wise, saving that the arlate Adrian a ffrenchman
who came a Passenger in the shipp the great Christopher from Riga, told and
acquainted this deponent upon the exchange London about the middle of the
moneth of October last past, that hee had beene very much solicited by
severall of the Company pf the English private man of warr who had seized
the said shipp the Christopher, to declare on their behalfe, that the said shipp at
the time of her seizure was bound for Holland or ffrance:/

To the second hee saith that the arlate Cornelius alias [?neels] Peterson one of
the parties examined in the prepatorie on the behalf of the said Chelston and Companie
was and is of this deponents certaine knowledge of him at Riga in [?Luifland] and since a very poore indigigent and extremely necessitous person, whom
this deponent knew very lately goe as a beggar and loose person at Riga, after which he was taken
on for a Souldjer by the souldjery there, and being altogether iinfitt for service
by reason of his sloathfull condition and miserable accoutrement, the Master
of the said shipp the great Christopher by name Michael Cruyger of this
deponents knowledge bought him of one Captaine Jacob Wingaerden for 9 rix dollars
and brought him aboard his said shipp some daies before she sett sayle from
Riga, and the said Neels Peterson shortly after absenting himselfe from the
shipp the said Michael Cruyger sent to seeke him out, and bring him aboard
againe, as hee accordingly was and being in such a poore condition that hee was
full of vermin, the said Cruyger gave him some sleight cloathes to Cover him
in which necessitous and verminous condition the said Peterson was at the
time of the said shipps seizure, and as this deponent hath credibly heard, he
hath since the time of his examination in this Court, been supplied with [?XXX]
and cloathes, which this deponent verily beleeveth (in regard hee the said Peterson had
no friends in theise parts being merely a stranger and having received no monie
for his service in the said shipp) the said Peterson had ontained by the [?XXX]
meanes of deposing in thos Cause contrary to the trueth, and so much hee
verily beleeveth (in reagard of the loose life and conversation of the said Peterson
well knowne to this deponent and many others) that hee might easily bee and really
was induced to doe, either by Lieutenant Mowat or some others concerned in the
presentation of this Cause against the right Owners of the said shipp and goods
And otherwise cannot depose./

To the Interrogatories./ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1.st hee saith hee well knoweth the interrate Lieutenant by name [?XXXX]
Mowat, as the said Lieutenant himsellfe declared to this deponent after the seizure of
the said shipp the great Christopher./

(To the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.250r Annotate
To the second hee saith hee was not present when the words mentioned in the
first article of the allegation in this Cause were spoken, but saith the same were, as the
said Joachim Wise hath often declared to this deponent spoken to the sayd
Wise by the said Lieutenant Mowat in the presence of one other man, whom hee tooke for one of the imployers of the said private man of warr and saith the said Wise hath [?XXXX] declared that
the said words were spoken before hee this said Wise was examined at all
in this Cause:/

To the 3. hee saith hee was onely a passenger in the said shipp the Christopher and
hath land, and driveth a Merchandizing trade at Riga, for Wynes, and from
thence with that Countrey Commodities And otherwise cannot declare the worth or
valew of his estate./:-

To the 4th hee saith hee the interrate Cornelius alias Neels Peterson was entertained
for Cooke aboard the said shipp the great Christopher where hee was not accompted
by any of the said shipps Companie to be any otherwise than an idle
unworthy and unserviceable person.

[?Jo?son] [?RXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

3us./

Simon Paulson of Stetin in Pomerland Mariner and
Stiersman of the said shipp the great Christopher aged
36. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined./

To the 1.st article hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the Contents thereof, otherwise
then that the arlate Joachim Wise Carpenter of the said shipp the great
Christopher hath severall times affirmed to this deponent That after the seizure of the
same, the Lieutenant of the private man of warr had offered him two hundred gilders if
hee would declare that the said shipp and her lading were at the time of her seizure
bound for Holland or ffrance, which hee refused to doe as being Contrary to the
trueth, or words to that effect./

To the 2d. hee saith that one Neels or Cornelius, (who was Cooke aboard the said shipp
at the time of her seizure) and whom this deponent hath knowne for about a yeare
last past first at Stetin in Pomerland, and since at Riga in Liefland, was and is
a poore despicable and worthelesse person, whom this deponent hath within that time
knowne to goe a begging and to be in a lousy and miserable Condition as an [?adle]
vagabond, and hath himselfe assisted him with cloathes to Cover his nakednesse
in hopes hee might be reduced to labour and thrive, and saith that the arlate Michael
Crugger finding the said Neels at Riga paid 9. rix dollers for him to a Captaine of
the Souldjery there, and finding him without shooes doublet or other necessaries
hee gave him some old cloathes to cover him, and tooke him aboard his shipp, all which
notwithstanding the said Neels continued and was at the time of the said shipps
seizure in a verminous and nastie condition for want of shift, and since the said
seizure this deponent hath seene the said Neels in a very good suite of Cloathes with
hatt and ribbons and gloves, which, this deponent in his Conscience is verily perswaded
hee had obtained from the said Lieutenant or some of the Imployers of the said man of
(warr
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.250v Annotate
was or by their means and procurement for deposing contrary to the trueth
concerning the shipp and goods now in question, and saith hee cannot [?conceive]
how the said vagabond person being utterly unacquainted in this Countrey, and
haveing not had nor deserved any wages for any service in the said shipp
could otherwise then by indirect and dishonest meanes gett such goods Cloathes
and accoutrements as aforesaid. And for a person of lewd and worthelesse
quality the said Neels was and is commonly accompted amongst the said
shipps Company, who generally could not endure to see him, and are fully
perswaded that for hope of gaines hee might bee seduced to sweare any thing
And otherwise cannot depose./

To the Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee knoweth the Lieutenant interrate by sadd experience
and saith hee hath often heard him called by the name of [?Movt] or [?Mowat]
by his owne men whilest hee this deponent was aboard with him and then in the said shipp the Christopher
after the seizure./

To the second negatively, And otherwise cannot depose:-?.

To the third hee saith hee this rendent was Stiersman of the said ship the
great Christopher And saith hee knoweth not what his estate is, and knoweth
not of a peny that hee is indebted./

To the fourth hee saith hee saw no monies or reward given to the said Neels
And otherwise referring himselfe to his former depositions hee cannot depose

Simon [?paylson] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and
doctor Godolphin
----
The 23th day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Claims of don diego Axcary. Domingo)
da Caldua and John Baptista da Mendiatta)
and others merchants of Bilboa for the)
shipp the Nostra Seniora da Bigona of)
which Vincent da Chararye is Captaine)
and goods in the same taken by the shipp)
the Richard and Mathew whereof Captaine)
Smith is Captaine in the immediat service)
of this Commonwealth. Smith Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the foresaid Claymers.

.1.

Rp.

Vincent de Chavarry of Porto=]
galata in Spaine Captaine and Commander
of the sayd shipp the Nostra Seniora de Bignona aged
39 yeares more or lesse a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet./

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that on or about
the 25th day of September 1653. Spanish stile the sayd don diego
Axcary. domingo da Saldua, and Juan Baptista da Mendiata
did really and truly buy the sayd shipp Nostra Seniora da Bygona
then called the house of yarfeild and her tackle apparell, furniture
gunnes sayles Cables anchors flaggs and other appurtenances
whatsoever att Bilboa, and payd for the same in the sight and presence
of this deponent in fflorins of fflanders money three thousand nine
hundred peices of eight, and that from and after that tyme and
continually since the foresayd don diego Axcary domingo de Saldua
and Company, all merchants of Bilboa [?XXXX]
[?Guoro] and this deponent Inhabitants of Portugaletta excepted were and att this present are
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.251r Annotate
the true and lawfull owners of the sayd shipp tackle and furniture and
for and as such commonly accounted having all the sayd tyme had possession
of her by this deponent Captaine of her on their behalfe. And saith that
noe dutchman subiect of the States of the United Provinces or ffrenchmen
subiects of the ffrench King after the foresayd 25th day of September
had or have any right title or interest therein or any part thereiof
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the
buying of the sayd ship as aforesayd hee saw the sayd Don Diego de
Axiary and owners aforesayd take and receyve possession of the sayd shipp
and the same was to them peaceably and quietly delivered in this
deponents presenece and they the sayd owners did thereupon equipp
and fitt her out to sea att their owne charge and constituted this
deponent Master or Commander of her for a voyage to fflanders
to navigate her with his shipps Company all Spaniards from Bilboa
to Ostend for their use and for and as their shipp and somuch was
generally knowne and taken notice of att Bilboa before the sayd shipp
sett sayle from thence. and otherwise cannot depose.

Yo the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that att the tyme of the
buying of the sayd shipp the Nostra Seniora de Bygona as aforesayd one
dirrick Peterson the then Owner and Proprietor of the sayd shipp then called
the Howse of Yarfeild now the Nostra Senoria de Bygona and her
tackle furniture and apparell did make a bill of sale of the same
before a Notary Publique att Bilboa in the presence of this deponent and
others unto them the sayd Don Diego de Axcavia, Domingo de Caldua
and John Baptista de Meadiotta, a true copy of which bill or Contract
of sale faithfully extracted out of the Protocoll of the sayd Notary and
authenticated was and remained on board the sayd shipp att the tyme
of her seizure in the possession of him this deponent; And saith that
the Contents of the same were and are true and so had and done
therein was and is conteyned, and that the sayd shipp the Howse of
Yarfeild and Don Diego de Axcary Dominego de Caldua and John
Baptista deMendieta in the sayd bill of sale mentioned, and the
shipp the Nostra Seniora de Bigona and the foresayd Don Diego de
Axcary Domingo de Caldua and John Baptista de Mendietta
in the proceedings of this cause named were and are one and the
same shipp and persons and not deivers. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after
the buying and furnishing of the sayd shipp as aforesayd John
Baptista da Mandatta, Thomas de Santa Columba and diverse other
merchants of Bilboa did lade and putt on board the sayd shipp her
present lading of woolls and Iron for the Accompt of themselves
and diverse others merchants of fflanders subiects of the King
of Spaine mentioned in the bills of ladeing found aboard the
the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure to be in the  sayd shipp from
Bilboa where the same were laden transported to Ostend in fflanders
and there to be delivered to them or their Agents for their uses
and Accompt, which sayd bill sof lading were and are true
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.251v Annotate
and reall and really and truly firmed by him this deponent
for the goods therein respectively mentioned, upon or about [?X]
dayes of the respectvie dates thereof and before the sayd shipp
sett sayle from Bilboa. And saith that noe Dutchmen subiects
of the States of the united Provinces nor ffrenchmen subiects
of the ffrench King had or have any right tithe or interest
in the sayd goods or any part thereof. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he is master of the sayd shipp and was aboard her att the tyme of her seizure
and came first into her att Bilboa in September last past

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp from September last and saith [?the]
same owners in this deponents presence bought the sayd shipp of and from the
foresayd dirick Peterson. and further referring himselfe to his foregoing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he saw the sayd Owners pay the foresayd moneyes as aforesayd
to the sayd derrick Peterson att Bilboa, and thereby knoweth they are the
lawfull owners thereof, but their severall shares therein att present he
remembreth not, saving this Rendents interest therein is proportional to [?500] [?XXX] of [?XXX]

To the .4. he saith he saw possession of the sayd shipp att Bilboa in September or October
1653 given by the sayd Peterson to the sayd John Baptista Mendista for and
on behalfe of himselfe and the rest of the Owners whose names are
don diego de [?Axravais]. domingo de calna. Pedro del Guero. and
him this Rendent, with out any other sharers or partners which he
knoweth being Master and partowner of the sayd shipp.

To the .5 he saith the sayd shipp came from Bilbo whither she now belongs, and was and is bound
for Ostend, being seized in her course thither, and knoweth not to which
port she did belong before she was bought att Bilboa as aforesayd and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 6. he saith he hath above mentioned all the Owners of the sayd shipp
who are as he saith all Spaniards and have lived with their families
for theis ten yeares in Spaine and for so long have bene knowne to and
by this Rendent who with the sayd Guiro was borne and inhabiteth att Porta Galeta
and the others att Bilboa, And otherwise cannot depose

To the .7. he saith the foresayd Owners have not any property in the goods
laden aboard the sayd shipp, nor are any of the sayd goods laden for
their accompt

To the .8th. he saith he saw the foresayd Owners att Bilboa whilest the sayd
shipp remained there. and the foresayd John Baptista Mendieta did lade
aboard the sayd shipp severall quantities of woolls, but otherwise than by the
bills of lading cannot set forth how much. and the sayd Thomas da
Santa Columba and Martin da Lano and others all Spaniards but
their names or parcells laden remembreth not, did lade severall
quantityes of wooll and iron aboard the sayd shipp, for the certainty
whereof in the particulars he referreth himselfe to his sayd bills of lading and
otherwise cannot depose saving that he saw the sayd woolls laden [?XX]
John Baptista Mendieta in his warehouses att Bilbo before the sayd [?XXX]
were laden, as also the greatest part of the sayd Iron and wooll in the [?shopps]
and warehouses of the other Laders not remembring their [?XXX]
names and severall parcells otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .9th. negatively to every part thereof

To the .10.th he saith this present voyage with the foresayd goods is the first
voyage that the sayd shipp hath made since she hath been
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.252r Annotate
to Blboa and was begunn from thence [1st ?December newstile] and saith her former voyage to Bilboa was with a lading of
salt and wine from ffrance as he hath heard but what port knoweth not
and otherwise saving as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the .11. negatively.

To the 12. hee cannot depose.

To the .13. he saith he was borne in and inhabeteth att Porta Galeta in Spayne
and hath interest in the sayd shipp as partowner to the value of 500 peaces
of eight. and othrewise negatively.

To the .12. he cannot depose.

To the .15. he saith that neyther the sayd Peterson nor any of his mariners were
aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme of her seizure nor att any tyme during
this voyage, and that all his Company are Spaniards and not any of them did belong
to the sayd shipp att the tyme of her sale aforesayd. and are with this Rendent 24. persons.

To the .16. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than negatively.

To the .17. he saith the sayd Peterson by report is an Hollander and
saith the moneyes expended upon the sayd shipp was not upon bottomry
nor in surance of repayment, and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .18. Interrogatory he saith he firmed bills of lading for the sayd shipps
lading but how many att present remembreth not and saith for every
distinct parcell he signed three bills all of one tenor, one of every
of which was aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure and came to
the hands of the seizors, and fourther saving his foregoeing deposition
to which he referreth himselfe, otherwise then negatively cannot
depose saving that the sayd bills of lading were signed att Bilboa
some a shoare some shipboard

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

Captaine Juan da Suaso of Portugalotta in Spaine aged
49. yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth  and saith as followeth

To the first second and third and 4th Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that in the moneths of September October and November last past the sayd
Don Diego Axcary domingo da Saldua and Company all Spaniards
were and att present are and ought to be the true and lawfull Owners of
the sayd shipp Nostra Seniora da Bigonna formerly called the Howse of
Yarfeild and her tackle and furniture, the premisses he knoweth
to be true for that upon the 25th of September 1653 he was present
and saw the sayd Owners pay for the same in ready moneyes the summe or
quantity of 3900 pieces of 8/8 and something over to the former master
of her to buy him a pair of gloves, which sayd former master was the
arlate Dirrick Peterson of which the sayd present Owners bought the sayd shipp 
and to him payd the sayd moneyes att Bilboa. and saith the sayd Owners did att
their owne costs furnish out the sayd shipp to sea and appoynted his precontest
Vincent de Chavarry one of the partownes master and Captaine of her
to sayle with her with his Company being all Spaniards upon this present
voyage, which was to be from Bilboa aforesayd wgere her
lading
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.252v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the .6.th Interrogatory he saith all the sayd owners are Spaniards and have
been all well knowne to this Rendent 10 yeares and upwards. and that
[?Axcary], [?Maniela] and Saldoa are natives and Inhabitants of [?XXXX]
and have bene with their families respectively .10. yeares and the
sayd Chavarry and Guero are natives and Inhabitants of Portugall
and so have bene .10. yeares last past with their families.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.253r Annotate
To the .9. negatively.

To the 10. he saith the sayd shipp began her last outward voyage from Bilboa
the first of this present December Spanish stile. and her former voyage
was as he believeth from Rochell with salt and wines, and farther saving his
foregoeing depositions cannot depose.

To the .11. and 12 he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

To the .13.th he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Portugalota aforesayd
and otherwise negatively.

To the 14. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .15. negatively

To the .16. he saith he this Rendent being familiarly acquainted with the
sayd Pedro Guero as dwelling in the same howse with him saw him take his
share of the sayd moneyes from the howse att Portugalota and pay the same att
Bilboa as aforesayd, and knoweth he did not take up the same of any Dutchman
and further cannot depose.

To the .17.th he saith the sayd dirick Peterson is as he hath heard an Hollander
an Inhabitant of Amsterdam. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 18.th he saith he was not present att the signing of the sayd bills of
lading nor any of them, and further otherwise than as aforesayd
cannot depose.

[?Xwdeevoe?d] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated with his contest before doctor Clarke
and doctor Godolphin
----
The 23th day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Thomas da Saracha Santa)
[?Columba] merchant of Bilboa for the shipp)
the Nostra Seniora da Bygonna lately)
called the ffaithfull Souldier whereof John)
[?XXX] was Captaine and her tackle)
apparrell and furniture and of John Baptista)
Mendieta and others of Bilboa and other
[?merchants] of Spaine and fflanders for the goods)
in the sayd shipp taken by some of the Parliaments)
[?ffleet] Smith. Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the
sayd Claymers.

.1.

Captaine Juan da Suasso of Portugalota
in Spaine Commander of the sayd shippp aged
49. yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposeth That on or
about the 14th day of August Spanish stile 1653 the arlate Thomas de
Saracha Santa Columba merchant of Bilbao in Spaine did really and truly
buy the sayd shipp the Nostra Senora da Byginna called the faithfull
Souldier in the sayd Towne of Bilboa of and from one John Barens with
all her tackle apparrell and furniture gunns and ammunnition whatsoever, and
payd for the same unto the sayd John Barens the then master and Owner of
her in the sight and presence of this deponent att Bilboa six thousand peeces
of eight more or lesse being of the value of 13430 fflorins. And saith that
the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba and Company all Spaniards from and after the sayd 14th day of August
1653 as and att this present is the true and lawfull Owner and Properietor
of the sayd shipp Nostra Senoria da Bygonna formerly called the ffaithfull
Souldier and her tackle apparell and furniture and for and as such commonly
accounted reputed and taken, which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and
being Captaine of the sayd shipp in the name of the sayd Owners. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the buying of the
sayd shipp as aforesayd he this deponent was presentand saw the sayd Thomas
doe
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.253v Annotate
de Sarchad Santa Columba taken quiet and peaceable possession of the same
which was delivered to him by the sayd John Barens in a solemne manner
according to the Custome of Spaine in the presence of a Notary And
further that the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba was and continued in the
quiet possession of the sayd shipp att Bilboa in August September
October and November last past and in that tyme did lay out and
expend severall summes of money in fitting and repariing of her with
materialls and provisions for a voyage from Bilboa to Ostend in fflanders
to carry woolls and Iron for the accompt of himselfe and other merchants
of Spaine and flanders which he knoweth being master and Commander of
the sayd shipp and privy to the foresayd premisses. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that upon the bying of the
sayd shipp the then master and owner of her John Barens did in the presence
of this deponent and others before one of the publike notaries of the
Royall Maiesty of Spaine residing in Bilboa make to him the said
Thomas de Santa Columba a bill of sale of the sayd shipp then called
the faithfill Souldier now the Nostra Seniora de Bigona and excerpted
aforesayd in a solemne manner after the lawes and Customes of Spaine a
true suthentick copy of which bill of sale he this deponenent, having
the same att Bilboa extracted out of the sayd Notaries protocoll confroming
in all things to its originall brought along with him aboard the sayd ship
and the same is true and the contents there of reall and so had and done
as in the same is conteyned on or about the tyme of the date thereof att Bilboa aforesaid.
And otherwise cannot depose saving that the shipp the faithfull Souldier
and Thomas Saracha Santa Columba in the sayd bill of sale mentioned and
the shipp arlate now called Nostra Senorea da Bygona whereof this depoennt
is Captaine and Thomas Saracha Santa Columba in this cause specifyed
were and are one and the very same shipp and persons and not divers.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith that after such tyme as the sayd
Thomas de Santa Columba had bought the sayd shipp as aforesayd he did fitt
out the same on a merchandizing voyage to carry woolls and Iron
upon his owne accompt and accompt of other merchants subiects of the
King of Spaine living in Spaine and fflanders from
Bilboa to Ostend, which he knoweth being Captaine of the sayd ship and
referring himselfe for the quantities, severall parcells laders and
accompt and consignataries to his bills of lading which are as hee
beleeveth in the Registry of this Court the which bills this deponent
signed att Bilboa with his owne hand and hand of his Purser att Bilboa upon or about the
respective dayes of the date thereof. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Thomas
de Santa Columba owner of the sayd shipp and others partwoners of his
Company were and are all Spaniards subiects of the King of Spaine and
so accounted, and all and singular the Owners of the sayd wools and
Iron being Inhabitants of Biscay and fflanders were and are
subiects of the King of Spaine and so accounted. and otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation he saith that all and singular the bills
of lading found on board the sayd shipp were and are true and
really and truly signed [?XXX] by him this deponent part by his purser att
Bilboa on or about the tymes of the dates thereof respectiveley
and otherwise cannot depose

To the last he saith he hath deposed trly.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.254r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he is master of the sayd shipp and so hath bene since August last
and came first aboard att Bilboa and was in her when she was seized.

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp 5 monethes. and otherwise to this
interrogatory saving his foregoing depositions cannot depose./

To the 3. he saith he saw delivery of possession of the sayd shipp made as aforesayd
to the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba for the use of himselfe and Companye all
Spaniards Lazaro de Vrmaithi Pedro del Guiero Jacques de Backer
and three others whose names he remembreth not att present wanting his
papers all being Inhabitants of Bilboa Badro dal Guiero excepted
who liveth in Portugalota. and otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition
cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith the sayd shipp came from Bilboa and is bound for Ostend
and beleiveth that before August last she belonged to Amsterdam and
further cannot depose.

To the .6. he saith he hath knowne Thomas Sarache Santa Columba 20 yeares and upwards and
he is a Spaniard borne and for 10 yeares last past and upwards hath with his
family lived in Bilboa. and John Mendietta from his infancy being a
native of Bilboa and there hath lived all his tyme. and saith for want of
his papers he remembreath not the names of the other persons interrogated, nor
can further or otherwise answer them by referring himselfe to his
foregoeing depositions.

To the .7th. hee saith he saw none of his shipps lading bought, and saith further
that saving the sayd bills of lading and that the Laders did att the tyme of
lading the sayd goods declare that they were really for the respective
uses and accompts of the severall persons to whose accompt they are entred
in the respective bills of lading for the same, he can give noe accompt
at all of the property of the sayd goods. and further cannot depose.

To the 8th he saith he saw the sayd John Baptista de Mondiela and others
the laders of the sayd goods att Bilboa about the tyme of the lading thereof, the
names of which Laders and their Country are as followeth. Thomas
de Columba ffrancisco de Serissar, Martin de LLano, Joan de ff[?XXXX]
all Spaniards, Giles de Buy a fflandrian, Juan de Barolla [?X]spaniard
Juques de Baquer a fflandrian, ffrancisco Bandorbaque a fflandrian
all which persons this deponent saw aboard his sayd shipp att Bilboa
and saith he saw most part of the sayd goods in the ware howses of the sayd
Laders att Bilboa before the same were laden, and particularly the
goods laden by Thomas de Santa Columba the principall Lader, and
the sayd persons did every of them come aboard with the goods by them
respectively laden, and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .9th. negatively to every part thereof.

To the 10th hee saith this last and present voyage is the outward voyage of
the sayd shipp and her lading is .9163 sackes of wooll or thereabouts
and 700 kintall of Iron or thereabouts for accompt as per bill of lading
to which he referreth and the sayd voyage was begunn .1st. December 
last past stile of Spanish; and her former voyage before she was bought
of the sayd Barens was as he hath heard from Saint Sebastians, but of that
hee can render noe accompt. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .11. negatively.

To the 12. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 13. he saith he was borne in and Inhabiteth att Portugalota in
Biscay 2 leagues from Bilboa. and otherwise negatively having noe
relation to the sayd Owners nor propriety in the sayd goods.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.254v Annotate
To the 14. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 15. he saith, that himselfe and shipps Company being in all
24 persons were taken in and aboard the sayd shipp since her being bought
aforesayd and are all of them Spaniards the Pilot excepted who is a
Hamburghese, and further that neyther the sayd JohnBarens nor any of
his Company that formerly belonged to her were aboard her att the time
of seizure nor att any tyme during the sayd voyage in question, And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .16 he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .17. he saith he hath heard the sayd John Barens is an Hollander
and of Amsterdam and further to this interrogatory cannot depose saving
he knoweth that the moneyes disbursed in furnishing out the sayd ship
was not upon bottomry or any other Insurance of repayment [?and ?is]
for the sole accompt of the foresayd owners which he knoweth  being Captaine
of the sayd shipp and privy to the sayd disbursements.

To the .19. he saith he this deponent by himselfe and purser did firme
severall bills of lading for the sayd goods but how many remembreth
not. and saith of and for each distinct parcell of goods he firmed
three bills of lading all of one and the same tenor, one of ebery which
came into the possession of the seizers, and the same were so signed att [?BXX]
upon or about the dayes of dates thereof respectively in manner
as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?XXX XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

2)

Pedro de Ceballa of Bilboa in Spaine [?merchant]
aged 22 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first second third and fourth 5. and 6th articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith
that the arlate Thomas de Saracha Santa Columba and Company [?XXXX]
subiects of the King of Spaine from and ever since the 14th day of August
last past 1653. were and att present are the lawfull owners of the sayd [?shipp]
Nostra Seniora de Bigonna whereof his precontest Juan de [?SXXXXX] [?is ?XXX]
which shipp the foresayd owners on or about the sayd 14thd ay pof August last
of the arlate John Barents the then master and owner of her then [?XXX]
at Bilboa in Spaine and called by the name of the ffaithfull Souldier for the
sume of 13480 florins, which moneyes this deponent saw the sayd [?XXX]
de Columba at Bilboa about the tyme aforesayd in the howse of [?JXX]
Cooper there really pay and satisfy to the sayd John Barents in peeces
of 8/8 to witt six thousand and odd peices of 8/8 coyne of Mexico
Sevilia and Segovia, he this deponent being desired to neare
witnes of the sayd payment by the foresayd Thomasde Santa Columba
who was and is a familiar acquaintance of this deponent and [?XXX]
neere neighbors in Bilboa. and moreover saith that he saw [?him ?given]]
possession delivered of the sayd shipp by the sayd Barents to the sayd [?XXX]
for him and Company, and  hath taken notice that they the sayd  [?XXX]
appoynted the sayd Captaine Swasse Comander of her and did [?fXXXX] [?XXXX]
out upon a voyage from Bilboa to Ostend, whether she os now bound.

[?XXXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.255r Annotate
well knoweth being a neighbour and freind of the producent that he did
lade severall great quantityes of wooll for his accompt aboard the sayd
shipp this deponent haveing seene some of them laden, and likewise bills of
lading for some of them signed, and that severall other merchants subiects
of the King of Spaine did lade severall good quantities of wooll and Iron
on board the sayd shipp for accompt of Spanish and fflandrian merchants, to be transported
to and discharged att Ostend, which this deponent did come to take particular
notice of for that being to come to this port of London he was once in
mynd to have shippt himselfe in the foresayd shipp, but afterwards lighting
upon an English vessell bound for this Port shippt himselfe in her and
sayled in her in Company of the sayd shipp arlate from Bilboa to the
tyme of her seizure now in question and saith there was a bill of sale
made of the sayd shipp by the name of the ffaithfull Souldier to the sayd Thomas
de Saracha Santa Columba by the sayd John Barents which bill or Contract
of sale this deponent saw in the Notaries booke in Bilboa who drew the same
upp, and saith that the sayd Thomas de Saracha Santa Columba and shipp ffaithfull
Souldier in the sayd bill of sale specifyed and Thomas de Sarachae Santa Columba
and shipp Nostra Seniora de Bigonna were and are the very same person
and shipp and not diverse. And further saving his subsequent depositions
he saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. negatively.

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp about 5 monethes and otherwise
saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the 3d. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd.

To the .4th. he saith the Owners of the sayd shipp are Thomas de Sancta Columba
Jacques de Backer and Pedro dal Guero and about 2 or 3 persons more
all Bicayners whose names att present he remembreth not, and for their
use thsi Rendent saw possession delivered of the sayd shipp to the sayd Sancta Columba
in the sayd moneth of August 1653 att Bilboa.

To the .5th. he saith he cannot depose saving that the sayd shipp came last from Bilboa
and is bound to Ostend.

To the .6. he saith he hath knowne Thomas de Saracha Santa Columba 10 yeares
and John Baptista de Mendietta 6 yeares, and they are both Spaniards and
Inhabitants of Bilboa and so have bene by report all their dayes, and there
now have their families: and others the owners of the sayd goods whose
names this Rendent remembreth not are as this Rendent credibly heard
before his comeing from Bilboa, Biskayners and fflandrians. and further
cannot depose.

To the .7. he saith he saw not nor knoweth of the buying of any of the sayd
woolls or iron. and further cannot depose.

To the .8. he saith he saw the sayd John Baptista de Mendietta att Bilboa and
aboard the sayd shipp whilst she lay there. and Thomas de Santa Columba in like
manner and sawe many quantities of woolls laden aboard the sayd shipp
in his the sayd Columbas warehowses att Bilboa before the same were laden and saw severall
boates passt off with severall parcells of his woolls to the sayd shipp.
and not knoweing the names of any more of the sayd Laders he cannot
depose whether or noe he saw them att Bilboa the tyme interrate and
otherwise cannot depos saving he saw severall other persons whom he knoweth to
be Spaniards lade goods aboard the sayd shipp but remembreth not their names.

To the .9. negatively.

To the .10. he saith the sayd shipp began her outwards voyage about 1st December
Spanish stile 1653. with he lading of wolls and Iron and can give noe
accompt of any other of her voyages.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.255v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 23th day of deecember 1653.

The Clayme of Don Diego [?Axcary] and)
pthers for the shipp Nostra Seniora da)
Bigonna Vincent Chavarry Captaine)

3)

Pedro da Sabala of Bilboa in Spaine
merchant aged 22 yeares or thereabouts deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.256r Annotate
the accompt of Spaniards and fflandrians subiects of the King of Spain
and for noe other accompt, and saith he came the more to observe the premisses
for that he was bound for London in an English shi[[ which sayld in
Company of the Nostra Senora de Bigonna arlate from Bilboa to the tyme
she was seized by the sayd frigat of this Commonwealth and otherwise
cannot depose saving that noe hollander or ffrenchman or any subiect
of the States generall of the united Provinces or ffrench King had
of hath any manner of part share or Interest in the sayd ship or her
lading so farr as this deponent knoweth beleiveth or hath heard

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the .1. negatively.

To the 2.: 3. and 4th. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp 3 moenthes and
upwards. and further referring himselfe to his forefoeing depositions
cannot depose saving that the sayd vincent de Chavary is likewise
a partowner of the sayd shipp.

To the .5.th he saith he cannot depose saving that the sayd shipp came last from
Bilboa and was bound to Ostend.

To the .6.th he saiththat the sayd don diego Azaro domingo Saldna and the sayd
Mendieta are all Biskayners by birth, and the sayd Saldna dn Mendieta
are Inhabitants of Bilboa and so have bene by report most part of their
tymes, and for 6 yeares last past of this Rendents knowledge having
knowne them so long. and the sayd Axary whom this Rendent hath knowne by
sight onely 3 monethes dwells about halfe a mile from Bilboa. and the
sayd Captaine Chavary is an inhabitant of Portugalota about a league from
Bilboa and there he hath lived of this Rendents knowledge 3 yeares. And
further cannot depose

To the 7th he saith he was not present att nor saw the buying of any of the
sayd goods. and further saving as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the .8th. he saith that he saw the sayd persons or owners above mentioned att Bilboa
whilest the sayd shipp lay there ad saw them aboard the shipp feasting
with their freinds. and saw severall good quantities of woolls par of the
sayd shipps lading in the possession of the sayd Mendieta who was the principall
lader, in his warehowse att Bilboa before the same were laden, and
saw the boates passe with the same to the sayd shipp for the lading of them
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9th negatively.

To the .10.th he cannot depose otherwise then as aforesayd. not having
knowne the sayd shipp before September last.

To the 11 and 12 he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 13. he saith he is a Biskayner by birth and an Inhabitant of Bilboa
and otherwise negatively

To the 14. 15. 16. and 17. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 18. he saith that in November last in the house of the sayd Mendietta
att Bilboa he this Rendent saw the sayd Captaine Chavary signe severall bills
of lading for some of the woolls laden by the sayd Mendietta in the sayd shipp
but how many remembreth not. and further cannot depose.

Pedro de [?Cavalat] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.256v Annotate
The 23th day of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

4)

Don ffrancisco La vega of Soria in Castile in Spaine
merchant aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

of himselfe and Company pay the summe of three thousand nune hundred
peices of eight more or lesse to an hollander named Dirrick Peterson
for the sayd shipp Nostra Seniora da Bigonna arlate then called the [?XXX]
of Yarfeild, which sayd shipp with her gunnes tackle and furniture being then
in the River of Bilboa this deponent was given to undersstand that the sayd

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.257r Annotate
To the 3d he saith he cannot otherwise depose than as aforesayd, saving he hath heard
that the sayd Captaine Chavary had an eighth part in the sayd shipp.

To the .4th. he saith he saw not possession of the sayd shipp given, but was desired
to have gone along with others to see the same made, and afterwards videlicet
in October and November last past saw the sayd persons in possession of her.
and never heard of any more Owners than the persons above mentioned as and
for owners.

To the .5th.

To the .6.

To the .7.

To the .8th. he sayth he saw a great part of the sayd woolls in the shopps
or warehouses of the foreayd Laders att Balboa before the same were laden
and saw many parcells thereof sent fro the sayd warehowses aboard the
sayd shipp in boates. and further saving as aforesayd
----
The 23th day of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Thomas da)
[?XXXX] Sonona da Bi[?gono])
[?XXX] Captaine Swasse commanded.)

3

Don ffrancisco la Vega of Sevia in Castile merchant
aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

The
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.257v Annotate
To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
being resident att Bilboa upon merchandizing busines in the moneth of
August last past and being upon a day about the middle of the sayd moneth
in the howse of John Cuyper in the sayd [?XXXX] (being neere to this
deponents lodging hee then and there saw the arlate Thomas
Saracha Santa Columba pay unto the arlate John Barents for the sayd
shipp Nostra Seniora de Bygonnna att that tyme lyeing in the River of
Bilboa six thousand and odd peices of eight the greatest part of the
moneyes he this deponent being an intimate acquaintance of he sayd
Santa Columba did att his desire tell and count att the tyme of payment
thereof as aforesayd; from and after which tyme to this present the sayd
Thomas de Santa Columba and Companye in whose names the sayd moneys
were payd have bene and are the lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp her
tackle and furniture, they the sayd Santa Columba and Companyto witt Jacques
de Backer Pedro dal Guero and one ffrancisco. and one Antonio
whose sirnames he remembreth not all Biskainers having as this
deponent then and there heard bought the sayd shipp of and from the sayd
Barents the then Master and Owner of her, but whether or not
the sayd shipp were then called the ffaithfull Souldier knoweth not. and
saith the sayd Owners thereupon became possest of the sayd shipp and sett her
out to sea and repaired and fitted her for this voyage from Bioboa
to Ostend which was begann about a moneth agoe under Command of
the sayd Captaine Swasse to whose mannagement the foresayd owners
did committ the sayd shipp the Nostra Seniora de Bygonna
all which this deponent being familiarly acquainted with the sayd Santa
Columba and resideing in Bilbo during the tyme she was so [?XXX]
and comeing aboard in her as a passenger, this present voyage [?XXX]
knoweth saw and observed and further canot depose

To the third he saith that not having seene the sayd bill of sale hee cannot
depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after the
buying and fitting of the sayd shipp as aforesayd in the monethes of October
and November last past att Biloboa the arlate Thomas de Santa Columba [?XX]
factor of severall merchants of Segovia well knowne to this deponent
did lade severall great quantities of woolls aboard the sayd shipp of the
certaine knowledge and sight of this deponent to be in the sayd shipp
transported to Ostend and there delivered for accompt of the sayd
merchants of Segovia. and hath credibly heard all the Iron and [?wooll]
laden aboard the sayd shipp were to be transported to the same place for the
accompt of merchants of Spaine and fflanders all subiects of the
King of Spaine.

To the fifth he saith that the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba and [?XXX]
Baptista de Mendiosa arlate are both of them Spaniards and subiects ppf the
King of Spaine and so accounted. and that the sayd merchants of Segovia
Bartolomeo de Vollasso, Marras Milian, Jami [?Beer], Don [?Pedro]
Melonda, JUan Bedez de Archaia, whom this deponent beleiveth to
be true owners of a good part of the sayd woolls, are all Spaniards
likewise and so accounted: And otherwise cannot depose

To the sixth he saith he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.258r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he was aboard the sayd shipp att the tyme of her seizure and
first shipped himself as a passenger about the 1st of December stile of Spaine
last past to sayle in her to the Duines; but was himselfe intending for
the port of London.

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp 4 or 5 monethes, and
saith being not present att the contract nor a witnes to the bill of sale interrate
he cannot otherwise depose touching the property of the sayd shipp than he
hath above deposed.

To the .3. he referreth himselfe to his forEgoeing depositions.

To the .4th. he saw the sayd Owners possest of the sayd shipp as aforesayd in September
October and November, but saw not possession depivered.

To the 5th he saith he hath heard that the sayd shipp before she was so bought did belong
to Holland and further saving that the sayd shipp came last from Bilboa bound
for Ostend he cannot depose.

To the .6th. he saith the foresayd Owners are all Spaniards natives of Biscay and
hath knowne Thomas Santa Columba 12 yeares and the rest about 5 yeares
and the sayd Columba hath lived with his family att Bilboa 10 yeares and there
now liveth with the same, and Jacques de Backer, and sayd ffrancsco and
Antonio for 5 yeares of this Rendents knowledge have lived in Bilboa and
there now live. and the sayd Pedro Guero 5 yeares of this Rendents knowledge
att Portugaleta and there now lives, which persons are owners of the
sayd shipp, and Mendiola interrate hee hath knowne 16. yeares to be an inhabitant
of Bilboa where he now lives, and further cannot depose.

To the .7th. he saith he saw not the sayd good bought nor can give ant further
accompt of the property of the same than as aforesayd

To the .8. he saith he saw the sayd Mendiola att Bilboa the tyme
interrate, and saw the sayd Columba lade goods aboard the sayd shipp and [?putt]
aboard with some parcells of them and saith he saw Jacques de Backer
and John Bolezde Archaca att Bilboa ythe tyme interrate and saw the
sayd 2 persons aboard and lade goods aboard videlicet wooll and saw
several quantities of the sayd woolls in the shipps of the sayd laders before
the lading thereof. And further cannot depose.

To the 9. negatively.

To the .10. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesaid this
being the first voyage the sayd shipp hath made since she was
knowne to this Rendent.

To the .11. and 12th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 13th he saith he is a native and an Inhabitant of Soria aforesayd
and otherwise negatively.

To the 14th. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .15th he saith that being a passenger aboard the sayd shipp he knoweth
that the sayd Barents nor any Holland Mariners were aboard the sayd shipp att
the tyme of seizurem and beleiveth that all her Company being
Spaniards were taken into her since her being bought as aforesayd And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 16. 17. and 18th. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof, but hath
heard that the sayd Barens is an Hollander

Sam Delablaie [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.258v Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4

Captaine Vincent da Chavary of Portagalota in
Spaine Commander of a certaine shipp called the
Nostra Seniora da Bigonna aged 39 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith the
arlate Thomas de Santa Columba, Jacques Backer Pedro del Guero and
two nephewes of the sayd Collumba whose names he remembreth not all
Spaniards natives of Biscay and well knowne to this deponent in August
September October and November last past were and att present are the true and
lawfull owners of the sayd shipp the Nostra Seniora de Bigonna whereof
the Captain Juan Suasso is Commander, which shipp they bought
in the sayd moneth of August of an Hollands skipper then master of the sayd
shipp whose name he remembreth not, and saith that about the 19th day of
the sayd moneth he saw the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba in behalfe of
himselfe and Company really pay the number of 6000 pieces of eight more
or lesse for the sayd shipp then lying att Bilboa in the howse of one
Cuyper in Bilboa to the foresayd Hollands skipper; and saith he after
sawe the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba and Jacques Bacquer accompanyed
with an Alguazil and a Notary Publique goe of from Bilboa in a [?boat]
to take possession of the sayd shipp in the sayd moneth of August, and
after that saw and observed that they fitted out the sayd shipp for
this present voyage under the Command of the sayd Captaine Swasse, which
sayd voyage was began .1st. December new stile from Bilbo, and the sayd
shipp is bound for Ostend whither this deponents sayd shipp that [?XXX]
in Company from Bilboa with the shipp arlate is also bound. And otherwise
he cannot depose./

To the third hee saith that he hath seene an authenticated Copy of a bill
of sale of the sayd shipp by the name of Il Soldado with some [?XXX]
which he remembreth not wherein the sayd Thomas de
Sarasha Santa Columba is the vendor, which he saw att Bilboa [?XX]
the sayd shipp departed from thence in the possession of the sayd Columba
which he hath since seene in the possession of the sayd Captaine [?XXXX]
aboard his shipp, and beleiveth that the contents thereof were and are
true, and saith that the shipp in the sayd bill of sale or copy named [?Il]
Soldado and the shipp Nostra Seniora de Begonna are one and the same
shipp and not diverse, and the sayd Thomas de Saracha Santa Columba [?XX]
vendor in the sayd bill of sale and Thomas Saracha Santa Columba in the
proceedings of this cause mentioned were and are one and the same
person and not diverse. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4th and 5th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that after the sayd shipp was
fitted as aforesayd she was laden with woolls and iron to be transported
in the sayd shipp from Bilbo to Ostend all as he hath heard before
came from Bilbo for accompt of the subiects of the King of Spaine
and the same were laden for the most part by Biscayers and in
particular remembreth that he saw the sayd Thomas de Santa Columba
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.259v Annotate
[BLANK PAGE IN ORIGIANL MANUSCRIPT]


HCA 13/68 f.260r Annotate
'D D D'

The 14th of November 1653 uppon the allegation
made on the behalfe of Suckleyes Clyents

Chelston and Company against the)
Shipp the greate Christopher and her)
ladeinge against John ffaltzbergh Phillip)
Roerliffe and others Smith Suckley)

John Pruse of Riga in Leiflands in the
Dominions of the Queene of Sweden
merchant aged one and fortie yeares or
thereabouts a witnes produced and examined
in this Cause Deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the said allegation he sayeth an deposeth That he
hath knowne the arlate John ffaltzbergh and Phillip Roerliffe arlate
for theis twoe yeares last past whoe for all the said time have beene
and yet are comonly reputed and knowne to be Inhabitants of Staten
in Pomerland under the Queene of Sweden arlate and sayeth the saud
ffaltenbergh Roerliffe and some others of Statenie have beene and still are
comonly reputed the lawfull owners and Proprietors of the Shipp the
greate Christopher arlate her tackle and furniture And further to this article
saveinge his subsequent answeares and Depositions he cannot Depose

To the second article hee deposeth and sayeth That in or about the moneth of
July 1653 arlate the Shipp the greate Christopher arlate was taken to
freight by the arlate Harman Becker and Tillman Bremer
merchants of Riga aforesaid to carry hempe and other goods from thence
to Dunkirke whether they were consigned to Abraham van Hogard and
Phillipp de Pape to be by them directed to London which he knoweth
for that hee this deponent upon the freighting of the said shipp at
Riga aforesaid comeinge Passinger in the said Shippe and haveinge
some goods of his owne aboard her told the foresaid Herman Becker
That he this deponent should stand in need of some money att the said
shipps arrivall att Dunkirke and that unlesse hee did furnish
him with letters of Recommendation That possibly hee this Deponent might by
necessitie to sell his this deponents comodities at an under rate or
valew or to that purpose whereunto he the same Harman Becker reply?ing]
told this deponent That He this deponent [?neither] nor fore any such thing
or that his goods should come to a badd markett ffor that as he sayed
the said Shipp was to goe to Dunqurke and from thence directly for London although the
Charter party was made for dunquirk, which hee told this deponent
was done purposely that the Shipp and goods might not become a prize
to the Hollander or used words to the same effect and purpose And further
cannot Depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.262r Annotate
aboard the Christopher arlate att the time of her seizure predeposed any
more but one sword that hee knoweth of which belonged to a ffrench man that
was Passinger in the said shipp which hee sayeth was taken away att the seizure
of the said shipp by the Prosperous arlate And sayeth That there was not any
Resistance or opposition made against the Company of the Prosperous or the men
put on board her by the arlate Generall [?muncke] neither was it possible in
this deponents Judgement for the said ship Christophers Companie to have made
any opposition therein for that there were three of the foresaid Captaine Swaynes
Company and three more of the arlate Generall muncks ffleete and
an English Pilott and the rest aboard her were onely three men and one
boy and two Passingers [?XXXXXed] the Generall Munckes [?ffleete] arlate
beinge behynd them soe that without a Pilott for three hours they could
not have carryed out the said Shipp to have gotten away from the said
English ffleete or from the men then aboard her And further cannot Depose

To the 12th article of the said allegation hee sayeth and Deposeth That att the time
of the Seizure there were aboard the said Vessell the greate Christopher
arlate one hundred and seaven and forty bundles of hempe sixteene fatts of [?potashes]
[?tow] hundred Tunns of Linseed all which were laden aboard the said Shipp att
Riga for the accompt of the ffreighters above named and three hundred pounds
of wax which were for this Deponents propper accompt and were consigned to
dunkyrke and from thence were to have beene transported to London
And this deponent for his part did never heare wither the arlate Michael [?Croyr]
the master arlate or any other of the said Master and Company say or affirme That the
said Shipp he greate Christopher or her Ladeinge arlate were bound for Holland
or Zealand or any other port or place within the dominions of the State
of the United Provinces And further cannot Depose Saving tat the said
Shipp and Ladeing predeposed did and doe belong to the Subiects of the
Queene of Sweden as is arlate/:

To the thirteenth article of the said allegation hee sayeth and Deposeth That after the
seizure of the Shipp the great Christopher as is predeposed The Lefetenanet of
the private man of warr the Prosperous arlate did tell this Deponent and
and others of the Company aboard the Christopher That the said shipp
and her Ladeing would certaynely prove prize or to that purport And this
Deponent thereunto replyeing to this effect [?videlicet] [?Hee] thought [?that] could
not be [?XXXXX] That they were freinds and [?XXX XXXX] and had nothinge
but free goods in her Hee the said Leifetenant Told this Deponent That
there was noe right to be had in England ffor nor shall be [?believed]
what [?XXX] say and [?you] shall npt ffor noe Parliament are a [?XXXX] of [?XXXX]
People [?XXXX] [?roagues] and Kinges murderers And that if the Hollanders
[?wXXX]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.264r Annotate
8th Novembris. 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Bartholomew Hermans of Riga in Leifeland merchant
aged about 22 yeares a witnesse produced and examyned in
this cause Deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the said allegation he sayeth That he knoweth not the owners and
Proprietors of the Shipp the great Christopher arlate but as he hath credibly heard
and believeth That the said shipp did and doth belong to Stetein in Pomerland

To the second article of the said allegation hee sayeth That in or about the moneth of
August last past the Shipp the Christopher arlate was taken to ffreight at
Riga arlate by the arlate Star[?neton] Becker and Tillman Bremerr to carry hempe
and other goods from Riga arlate to Dunkirke and from thence to London which
hee knoweth having seene the Charter partie which was made and signed
uppon the takeinge the said shipp to frreight And
further cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.267r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
9th Novembris. 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Simon Powlesone of [?Stateni] in Pomerland marriner
Steeresman of the Shipp the greate Christopher aged 36 yeares
or thereabouts a witness produced and examyned in this Cause
Deposeth as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.270r Annotate
The tenth day of November 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

4

Michaell Cruyer of Stettyn in Pomerland
Master of the Shipp the greate Christopher aged about 40 
yeares a witnesse produced and examyned deposeth as followeth

To the first article of the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth That hee this
deponent hath bene Master of the Shipp the greate Christopher arlate ever
since shee was built which hee sayeth was built att  Stettyn in Pomerland and
there finished the last Springe. which hee knoweth for that hee this deponent
caused the same to be built there And sayeth
that the arlate John ffaltzbergh Phillip Roerlift the wydowe of one [?Tunnabeck]
Martyn Necker Anthonie [?XXXX] and dederith Massee and this Deponent
all of Stetteyne arlate and Herman Becker of Riga in Liefland were and are
commonly knowne and reputed the lawfull owners and Proprietors of the Shipp
the greate Christopher arlate her tackle and furniture. And further to this
article saveinge his depositions hereafter followeinge hee cannot Depose.

To the second article of the said allegation hee sayeth and Deposeth that within the
time arlate videlicetin the moneths of July or August 1653 the said Shipp
the greate Christopher was taken to freight by Herman Becker arlate and
Tillman Bromer Inhabitants and Burghers of Riga in the dominion of the
Crowne of Sweden arlate att Riga aforesaid thence to carry and
transport goods as hempe Pottashes and other Commodities to the Port of
London after which agreement he sayeth he said Becker and Tillman Bermer
the ffreighters afforesaid feareing that of the Charter parties arlate should
be made directly for London if the said shipp and goods should or might
be mett withall at Sea by the Hollander the same might be seized uppon and
be made Prize did make the Charter for Dunquirke where this
Deponent was to goe to deliver his said Shipps ladeinge to Abraham
Van Hogard and Phillip de Pape the said ffreighters ffactors and Correspondents
att Dunquirke from hence he was to receive orders and direction for
his this deponent transportinge the said goods for Lonon. And further to
this article saveing his subsequent Depositions hee cannot Depose

To the third 4 5 and sixth articles of the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth
That in or about the moneth of August last past the arlate Harman Becker
and Tillman Bremer being Inhabitants of Riga arlate and Subiects
of the Queene of Sweden arlate did cause to be Laden and putt aboard the
Shipp the greate Christopher severall quantities of Hempe Potashes Lynsseed
and other merchandizes as is arlate to be transported from Riga where
hey were laden to Dunquirk as afforesaid And sayeth That the said Becker
and Bremer for ought that appeared to this Deponent were in quiet and lawfull
possession of the said goods and were commonly reputed and taken to be lawfull
owners
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.270v Annotate
owners and proprietors of the said goods and Merchandizes as allsoe have beene
and yett are commonly knowne and reputed Burghers and Inhabitants of
Riga arlate and Subiects of the Crowne and Queene of Sweden and of this
Deponents certayne knwoledge the said Herman Becker and Tillman [?XXX]
have beene and still are Inhabitants of Riga afforesaid And further cannot
Depose.

To the 7th and eighth articles of the said allegation he sayeth and deposeth That the
said Shipp the greate Christopher arlate haveing receaved her Ladeinge arlate
as afforesaid sett sayle there with in her intended voyage for
Dunquerke as afforesaid and from thence  for London but in her course
thitherwards hee sayeth That in or about the moneth of August arlate shee
did meete with Dewitz the Hollands Generall arlate neere Vliesland whoe hayled this
Deponent and Commanded him aboard his said Shipp which this De[onent haveing
noe power to resist was inforced to obey and carry as with him all his Paers
Sea breifes and writings concerning the said Shipp and acquainted the said
Generall with the proceedings of his voiage from Riga and that hee was
bound to Dunquerke and showed him his Charter party which expressed to this effect
whereupon the said Generall badd this deponent That albeit hee [?XXX]
[?XXXered] suspition that the said Shipp the Christopher was bound for [?XXX]
yet in regard his Charter Party and papers expresse the contrary That for his
part he would not longer stay him [?or] that pasporr and thereupon forthwith
dismissed this Deponent with his said shipp and all her Ladeing and gave
him this deponent a Certificat or Passe to secure him from being [?againe]
intercepted by any of the said Generalls ffleete in his said voyage [?XX]
[?XXX] ?XXX] this deponent did prosecutre and keepe untill that the [?said]
Captaine Swayne meeting with this deponent after his being freed from
the dutch ffleete as afforesaid did on oor about the tenth day of September
last past did hayle this deponent and his Company in the Christopher and
Comannded this Deponent aboard his shipp being the Prosperous [?unto]
whome this deponent sayeth that hee likewise shewed all his [?proper]
Passes and writings which concerned the said Shipp and the voyage
predeposed and desyred that in respect the said Shipp came from  [?XXX]
and that shee was goeing for Dunquirk That
he and his Company would permitt him and his said Shipp to [?goe]
quietly onward in the intended voyage How beit hee sayeth the [?said]
Captayne Swayne would not suffer this Deponent and Company [?XX ?XX ?XX]
[?XXX] uppon this deponents said Shipp and her ladeinge and [?forceibly]
possest himselfe thereof and would not permitt this deponent to goe
againe
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.271v Annotate
To the Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatorie hee sayeth That he cometh to testify in this cause
beinge required thereunto by the merchants concerned in this cause and in [?XX]
of his interest and proprietie in and to the goods predeposed and sayeth that he ethis rendent
is owner of halfe the Shipp the greate Christopher exceptinge one twoe and thirtieth
part and otherwise negatively wishing right prevayle in this and all other causes

To the 2: Interrogatorie he answereth That the forementionedJohn Falzbergh
hath one sixteenth part Phillipp Reetcliffe hath one eigh parte Anthony [?Hauto] hathone
eight part Nartin Necker and the Wydowe [?Tunnenender] have an eight part [?Dederick]
Masso hath a twoe and thirty parte and Harman Becker hath a sixteenth part of
the said Shipp which he knoweth for that hee this rendent did sell the said Shipp
and received the proportionable shares for the same from all the parties [?afore]
mentioned the said Hanncan Becker excepted who as yett hath not payed his
share for some part of his part thereof And further cannot answeare.

[ADD DATA]
----
14th Novembris 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

5

Edward Lewies of London merchant aged 52 yeares or thereabouts
a witnesse produced and examyned in this Cause deposeth as
followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.272v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
15th of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

5

William Becker of Riga in the Kingdome of London
merchant aged [?22] yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced
sworne and examyned in this Cause deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.273r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 21.th day of January 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The office of the Judges of the high Court)
of the Admiralty promoted by James Dry Captaine)
of the ship the Saint John Baptist in the ymediate)
[?service] of this Common Wealth against William)
[?XXX] of Great Yarmouth. ffrancklin Clements)

Examined upon the articles in this cause administred
against the said [?James]./.

[?XXXXXXXXXXXXXX]
[?XXXXXXXXXXXXX]

Rp. et [?X] 6 [?XXX]

Henry Hudson of Eastsmithfeild in the parish
of Saint Buttolph without Allgate London Marriner aged
32 yeares or thereabouts sworne and Examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.274r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

Henry Hodson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation.

2dus.

John Symmonds of the parishe of Stepney in the County of Middlesex
Mariner aged 21 yeares or thereabouts worne and examined deposeth

To the second article of the articles in this cause administred hee saitha nd deposeth
That in or about the moneth of August last past the arlate James [?Durgen]
being out at Sea upon the Coast of Holland in and with the ship the Saint John
Baptist whereof hee was then Commander did meete withall surprize and
Take a certaine vessell by the name of the Mary of Mosse whereof
Kindt ffredrickson was Master and for the use and on the behalfe
of the States of this Commonwealth. And soe much hee saith ws and is
well knowne unto the arlate William James who after the seizing of the said ship and whilest
shee was in Yarmouth roade under the said seizure did come from shoare att
Yarmouth and was abord her. which hee knoweth being at the tyme aforesaid
Gunner of the said ship the Saint John Baptiste and seeing the premisses and soe had
and done as is predeposed. And further cannot depose/.

To the third and 4th hee saith and dposeth That after such the seizeig
and surprizeing of the said shippe the Mary of [?Mosse] and whilest she was
upon the open Seas within the Jurisdiction of this Court and under the said seizure
above mentioned hee the said William James of his owne accord and without
any lawfull authority for the purpose given unto him and without the privity and consent
of the said James Day (as he the said William James hath in the presence and hearing
of this deponent and others his contests often confessed and declared) did in the nighte tyme come
from Shoare at Yarmouth on bord the said ship the Mary of [?Mosse] then lying in Yarmouth
roade, and from hence did [?XXX] upon and take into his possession and Custody a [?XXXX] Cable
accompted
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.274v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
the ssame day Examined upon the sayd Articles.

3s.

Isaack Alboroughe of Dover on the County of Kent
Shipwright aged 40 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined deposeth

To the second third and 4th articles of the Articles in the [?allegation]
given
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.275r Annotate
given and admitted hee saith and deposeth That in or about the moneth of August 1653
the arlate James Day being out att sea in the ymidiate service of this Commonwealth in and with
the ship the Saint John Baptiste arlate whereof he was then Commannder upon the Coast of Holland
did meete withall Surprize and take a ship the name whereof was the mary of [?Motta]
Comanded by the arlate Kindle ffredrickson which ship hee soe seized for and on the behalfe
and use of the state and Commonwealth of England And saith that after such the seizure of the
said ship shee was by the said Captaine Day and Company brought into Yarmouth Road, and
for the more safe conduct thereof the saud Day appoynted one Thomas Laudsdale and others
of his owne shipps company to [?bee] as master and other officers and marriners on bord her.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.275v Annotate
the same day Examined upon the said Articles

4.tus

Walter Lyssengham of great Yarmouth in the County of Norfolke marriber aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts sworne and Examined deposeth.

To the second third and 4th articles of the articles in this cause given and administred he saieth and deposeth
That in or about the moneth of August last past the arlate James Dry being Comander of
the Saint John Baptiste and out att Sea off the Coast of Holland therewith iin the [?XXX] of this Common
wealth did meete withall 

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.276r Annotate
E.E.E.

The third day of October 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

Robert LLewellin and Company against)
Henry Powell late Master of the Hopewell)
Clement Suckley.)

Examined upon the sayd libell

3.

Richard Clarke of Wapping in the parish of Stepney and
County of Middlesex Mariner where hee hath bin an Inhabitant
for these sixteene yeares last past or thereabouts a witnesse
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first second third and fowerth articles or positions of the libell hee saith
and deposeth That hee hath heard divers of the company of the shipp the
hopewell saye and affirme that the arlate Peter Mackerell
and Valentine Austin and others were the true and lawfull Owners and proprietors 
of the sayd shipp the hopewell of London her tackle apparrell and furniture
during the tyrme arlate and soe hee beleeveth them to be And and as hee hath allsoe
heard from divers of the sayd shipps company and also from the arlate Powell himselfe the arlate henry
Powell was by the arlate Austen and the rest of the sayd Owners appointed
Master and Commander of the sayd shipp and went as Master of her the voyage
arlate And hee further saith that hee well knoweth that in the moneth of
October 1652 arlate and to the best of this deponents remembrance on the thirteenth
day of the same moneth) the sayd henry Powell as Master of the sayd shipp
the hopewell came to the five Iland, a port in Antego where hee then found
the shipp the Recovery arlate of which Captaine William Swifte was Master
or commander, in a leakie and disabled condition, and hee hath heard the sayd
henry Powell and alsoe divers others ofthe Company of the shipp hopewell saye that
hee was imployed by the Owners of the sayd shipp hopewell only on purpose to
receave on board the sayd shipp hopewell the ladeing and goods which were
on board the sayd shipp called the Recovery and was ordered to come
therewith directly for the Port of London arlate and not to staye any longer tyme
at the sayd port of five Ilands in Antego then he could conveniently take
in the sayd goods and ladeing this hee deposeth being then on board the sayd
shipp the Recovery and of that shipps company and helpeing to lade all the
goods which were laden out of the sayd shipp the Recovery into the sayd shipp
the hopewell And further to these articles hee cannot depose saving hee saith that
at the arrivall of the sayd shipp the hopewell at the five Ilands aforesayd the
sayd shipp the Recovery was ready to deliver and unlade her ladeing aboard
the sayd shipp the hopewell./

To the 5th hee saith that before and after the arrivall of the shipp the hopewell
arlate at the five Islands aforesayd there was a generall reporte that Prince
Rupert arlate was to the Leewarde of the Island of Antego with certayne
men of warr and had taken some English vessells in those parts and soe much could not but be heard of and taken notice of by
the arlate henry Powell and his shipps company by [?reason] of the generality of the reporte and further to this article hee cannot
depose./

To the 5th and 7th articles of the libell hee saith and deposeth that the shipp the hopewell arlate
imediately upo the arrivall at the five Islands aforesayd in Antego [?mightXXXX] hee the sayd
henry Powell had fitted and prepared his sayd shipp in a readinesse to receave the same and diligently applyed [?himselfe] to have
taken in all the ladeing which shee was there to take and receive in from the sayd shipp the
Recovery within the space of sixe or eight dayes at the most and might in all probability
have
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.277r Annotate
hee saith that aboput two dayes after the seizure of the sayd shipp the hopewell by
Prince Rupert the Governor of Antego arlate having intelligence of the sayd seizure
did come downe and brought to that Port with him [?of the XXXXX aforesayd] about two or three hundred
men to defende the Port and the sayd shipp the hopewell in case she had not bin
irrevocably lost before his comeing./

To the 14th hee saith that saving his former depositions to the first second third
4th 8th and 9th articles to which hee referreth himselfe hee cannot depose

To the 15th hee cannot depose

To the 16th and 17th hee saith that the arlate henry Powell was and is comonly reputed
to be a subiect of the Commonwealth of England and is as this deponent beleeveth subiect
to the authority of the Court arlate And further hee cannot depose

To the 18th he saith hee cannot depose/

To the 19th hee saith that his former depositions are true and further hee cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories? [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith that the Interrate Henry Powell was
in the yeares 1651 and 1652 comonly accomoted Commander of the hopewell and further
hee cannot answere saving hee saith that of this rendents knowledge the sayd henry Powell
brought Negroes in his shipp the hopewell to the Barbados Interrate in July 1652 but for whose
Accompte they were or what number they were of them he knoweth not/

To the second he saith that hee came to testifie in this casue at the request of Valentine
Austin, one of the producents and hath receaved nothing nor is promised ought for his
testimony in this behalfe but expecteth to have his necessary charges borne and noe more
And otherwise negatively./

To the third hee knoweth nothing of the contents thereof

To the 4th hee saith that saving his depositions to the severall articles of the libell given
in this cause to which hee referreth himselfe hee cannot answere/

To the 5th that the vessell the hopewell Interrogate had (to this Rendents last remem=
brance) noe more then sixteene smale gunns belonging to her ad for the number
of her men hee knoweth not what their number was and saith upon
serious consideration he doth thinke and beleeve that it was not possible for
the Company belonging to the hopewell Interrogate (if they had bin all in her when shee
was sett upon to be seized by Prince Rupert to have made such resistance against the sayd
Princes forces as to have avoided the sayd shipp being taken by the sayd Prince
Rupert And saith that after the sayd Prince Rupert had seized the hopewell Interrate
the Interrogant Henry Powell and such of his Company as were in the sayd shipp the hopewell at
the seizure thereof and made a shifte to escape out of it did staye on shoare at
Antego about a fortnight till they could conveniently gett passage for the Barbados, but not to get the
rest of the lading out of the shipp the Recoverie Interrogate which was not delivered
on board the hopewell, as this Rendent beleeveth for that hee this rendent
well knoweth that the sayd Prince Rupert after hee had soe seized the sayd
shipp the hopewell did staye three or foure dayes in or neere the Port where hee tooke
her and in that tyme tooke all the rest of the goods out of the sayd shipp the
Recovery
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.278r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The third day of October 1653./

Powell and others against Austin)
Suckley Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd Austen

3.

Richard Clarke of Wapping in the parish of Stepney
and County of Middlesex Mariner where hee hath bin an habi=
tant for these 16 yeares last past or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.279r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 4th of October 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

Abraham Smith against a certayne Shipp)
called the John and Mary of London)
whereof John Langley was and is Master)
and against the sayd John Langley John)
Elliot [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Thorowgood [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Mordant)
and others owners of the sayd shipp)
Clements Smith)

Examined upon the Libell in this cause./

1us

Thomas Wright of the parish of Stepney Barber
Chirurgion of the sayd Shipp the John and Mary
aged twenty nyne yeares or thereabouts a
witnesse sworne and examined deposeth
as followeth

To the first and second articles of the libelll hee saith that during all the tyme arlate the
arlate John Elliott  Mr Thorowgood Mr Mordant and one Mr [?Rice] were
comonly reputed to be the true and lawfull owners of the shipp the John and
Mary arlate, And he hath heard that the arlate John Langley was during
all the sayd tyme and is owner of a sixteenth parte of the sayd shipp And
this hee knoweth being Chirurgion of the shipp for the voyage arlate

[ADD DATA]

To the third article hee saith and deposeth that the arlate John Langley hath divers
tymes in this deponents presence acknowledged and confessed that hee was
by agreement with the sayd Smith to give him over and above his wages
mentioned in the schedule arlate two Negroes to be delivered him at the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.279v Annotate
Barbados or the value of them as they would there yield And this
deponent knoweth this the better for that heee was a witnesse to a
writing mentioning the contracte made betweene the sayd John Langley and the sayd
Smith to the effect predeposed, And further to this article saving his subsequent
depositions hee cannot depose./

To the 4th article hee saith that the shipp the John and mary did
proceede on the voyage and imployment arlate and the arlate Smith and
Prince entered  into pay on the seaventh day of January 1651
as is arlate and arived in Ginney in the Moneth of May next insueing
and came safe to the Barbados about the 8th of december next
following and delivered her  ladeing safely at every Port And hee further saith that
the sayd Maurice Prince dyed in Guinney as a servant to the sayd
Smith on or about the seaventh day of May 1652 but the sayd
Abraham Smith served in the sayd shipp from the 17th of January 1651
untill the 19th of August 1653 (when the sayd shipp returned to London
in safety) and in soe farr as this deponent observed by him (being chirurion
of the sayd shipp the sayd voyage) did performe his sayd office of Masters
Mate with care and diligence And further saving his subsequent depositions
hee cannot depose./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.281r Annotate
The 5th of October 1653

Examined upon the sayd Libell./

4.

William Jackson of Wapping wall in the parish of
Stepney and County of Middlesex Mariner Boatswaine of
the shipp the Recovery aged 44 yeares or thereabouts
a witnesse sworne and examined in this cause saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first second third and 4th articles of the libell hee saith and deposeth that
the arlate Valentine Austen as this deponent hath heard divers of the Company
of the shipp the Hopewell sat and affirme, was a part Owner of the sayd shipp her tackle Apparrell and furniture during
all the tyme arlate, but what part hee had therein hee knoweth not nor hath heard
but well knoweth that the sayd Austen came in the sayd Shipp the voyage in question
to Antwgo as Cape Merchant thereof And saith that the arlate Henry Powell came
as Master of the sayd shipp the Hopewell the voyage in question to Antego from
the Barbados and arrives at Antego in her as Master thereof in the moneth of
October 1652 arlate And was imployed thither on purpose by one Colonell Birch upon freight to be allowed to the Owners of the sayd Shipp to receave aboard
his shipp the Hopewell all such ladeing as was then and there aboard the shipp
the REcovery arlate wherof the arlate Captaine Sweifte was then Master and
the same hee hath heard the sayd Powell oftentymes confesse and acknowledge
And saith that the sayd Powell did accordingly take upon
him the sayd Trust and received order to lade the sayd ladeing with all
speede and to returne therewith to London soe sooe as possibly hee could
and further to these article hee cannot depose saving his subsequent depositions

To the fowerth and fifth articles hee saith and deposeth that the arlate henry
Powell did about the 13th day of October 1652 arlate arrive at the Port
of the five Islands in Antego with his shipp the hopewell, and that the
Shipp the Recovery arlate at such his comeing was ready to have
delivered her ladeing aboard the sayd Shipp the hopewell And alsoe
saith that before and at and after the arrivall of the sayd Powell at Antego as
aforesayd there was a generall report that Prince Rupert was to the
Leewards of Antegoe and had taken some Eglish vessells, and in all likelihood
the same could not but be well knowne to the sayd Powell by reason
of the generality of the sayd reports. And further hee cannot depose./

To the 6th and seaventh articles of the sayd libell hee saith and deposeth
that the arlate Henry Powell imediately after his arrivall at Antegoe
might if hee had caused his men to worke constantly and diligently thereupon
have taken in all the ladeing of the shipp Recovery aboard his shipp the
Hopewell arlate in sixe or eight dayes at the most and if hee had soe
done might as this deponent verily beleeveth have departed in safety therewith
towards London But saith that the sayd Powell did divers dayes after his
arrivall at Antegoe aforesayd foe him selfe and fower or five of his
men with him and imployed them selves about fishing and haleing of tackles
and such like imployment and continew out some dayes till nyne or tenn
of the clock and some dayes longer whereby the service of takeing in the
ladeing of the sayd shipp the Recovery on board the sayd shipp the Hopewell
was much hindered and retarded and by reason thereof some parte
only
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.281v Annotate
only and not all the ladeing of the Recovery was laded aboard the
sayd shipp the Hopewell and that at severall tymes as the sayd Powell
his company would take it in whereas the whole ladeing of the sayd
shipp the Recovery might in 6 or 8 dayes at the most have bin laded
aboard the Hopewell if the sayd Powell and his company had diligently
attended and endeavoured the ladeing aboard of the sayd Ladeing [ADD DATA]

To the 8th and 9th articles of the libell hee saith that the arlate Henry
Powell on the twenty fowerthh day of October 1652 arlate and before
hee had received aboard his shipp the Hopewell the whole ladeing of
the Recovery arlate did leave his shipp the Hopewell and went himselfe
and tooke fower of his shipps Company with him who were to worke
in her about takeing in of the ladeing predeposed of and one more who was
a passenger in his sayd shipp and tooke a shallopp and went to the
Barbooda Islands arlate being about eight Leagues from Antwgo to make
benefitt to them selves by getting what goods they could out of a
Spanish shipp which was sayd to be there wracked and the sayd Powell
and the Company with him continued at the
sayd Barbooda Islands 3 or 4 dayes videlicet untill after the shipp the Hopewell
withall her ladeing aboard her and her tackle apparrell and furniture were
seized upon by Prince Rupert, which was on the thirtith day of October
1652, and came not any more back hee nor his sayd men to the sayd
shipp the Hopewell and this hee knoweth  for the reasons aforesayd and further hee cannot depose saving hee saith that
hee this deponent beleeveth the shipp the Hopewell arlate with all her
tackle furniture apparrell and ladeing aboard her at the tyme of her
seizure was worth three thousand pounds at least./

To the 10th and 11th articles hee saith that hee beleeveth that at the tyme of the seizure of

[ADD DATA]

To the 12th and 13th articles he saith that at the tyme when the Hopewell
arlate was sett upon and surprized by Prince Rupert as aforesayd the sayd
Powell and the fower men and a passenger which went with him as is predeposed to the
Barbooda Islands were absent and returned noe more to the Shipp the Hopewell
but there were divers of the Company of the Shipp the Hopewell that were
on board the same when Prince Rupert first sett upon the sayd shipp who
togeather with this deponent and the rest of the Company of the Shipp the REcovery aforesayd
did make some smale resistance, what they were able to doe, but findeing
them selves unable to doe any good by resistance did deserte the
shipp the Hopewell and in boates make to shoare to save their lives [?XX]
beleeveth that had the sayd Powell and the men with him bin alsoe on board
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.283r Annotate
that the sayd Powell and his Company did goe a fishing and hayleing
of Turtles and the like as is predeposed of was in the morninge and did
much hinder the speedy ladeing of the goods in the Recovery aboard the
Hopewell, but beleeveth the fish by them soe taken was [?spent] in the shippe the
Hopewell and further saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose/

william Jackson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon an alleagtion on the behalfe of
the sayd Austen

Powell and others aganinst Austin)
Suckley Clements)

William Jackson of Wapping Wall in the parish
of Stepney and County of Middlesex Mariner Boatswaine
of the shipp the Recovery aged 44 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined in this
cause saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first second third and fowerth articles of the sayd allegation hee
saith that hee well knoweth that the arlate Valentine Austen
came to Antego in the shipp the hopewell the voyage arlate as Cape
Merchant of the sayd shipp that voyage, and as this deponent hath heard
divers of the Company of the Hopewell say and affirme was a part
Owner of the sayd Shipp her tackle apparrell and furniture during
all the tyme arlate but this deponent knoweth not what part hee had therein
nor hath heard, And further saith that the arlate henry Powell
came as Master of the sayd Shipp the hopewell the voyage
arlate from Barbados to Antego and arrived at Antego in the moneth
of October 1652 And was imployed from the Barbados thither by
one Colonell Byrch (upon freight to be allowed to the owners of the
sayd shipp) only on purpose to receave aboard his sayd shipp
the hopewell all such Ladeing as was then at Antego aboard
the Shipp the Recovery of which Captaine Swifte was Master and was
ordered to take all the sayd ladeing aboard with all the speede hee could
and returne therewith to London, And alsoe saith that the sayd Powell
did arrive at the Port of the five Islands in Antego about the 13th day of
October 1652 at which tyme and place the shipp Recovery was ready
to have delivered all her ladeing aboard the sayd shipp the hopewell
And that before and at the arrivall of the sayd Powell with the Shippe
hopewell at Antego there was a generall report there that Prince
Rupert was to the Leeward of Antego and had taken some English
vessells which reporte could in all likelyhood by reason of the
generality thereof but come to the hearing and knowledge of the sayd
Powell and further to those articles hee cannot depose/

To the 5th and 6th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith that hee this
depnent being boat swaine of the shipp the Recovery and workeing
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.284r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
the 6th of October 1653./

LLewellin and company against Henry Powell)
late Master of the Hopewell Clements Suckley)

Roger Escott of Wapping in the parish of Saint
Mary Matsellon alias Whitechappell Carpenter of
the shipp the Recovery aged 40 yeares or there=
abouts a witness sworne and examined in this cause
saidth and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.286r Annotate
to Antego there was in the shipp the Recovery a hundred and sixty or one
hundred and seaventy tunne of goods and that the Recoverye laye side by side with the
hopewell for delivery of the goods And saith that forty or fifty men mighte convein
ently have wrought in takeing the goods out of the Recovery and stowing them
in th ehopewell, and that the company belonging to the Recovery was about eleven
or twelve men and that they did unlade the sayd goods out of the Recovery
as fast and as often as the hopewell and her company would attend the takeing of
them on board their sayd shipp./

To the 7th

To the 8th 9th and 10th

To the 11th

To the 12th

To the 13th hee saith

the marke of the sayd
Roger 'R' Escott [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin./
----
The same day

Powell and others against Austen
Suckley Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd Austen

5

Roger Escott of Wapping in the parish of Saint Mary Mat
sellon alias Whitechappell and County of Middlesex Mariner Carpenter
of the shipp the Recovery aged 40 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined in this cause saith and deposeth
as followeth videlicet./

To the first second third and 4th articles of the allegation hee saith and deposeth
that the arlate henry Powell was comonly reputed Master of the shipp the
hopewell arlate for the voyage arlate and did take upon him the voyage
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.287v Annotate
Interrogatories hee answereth and deposeth in all things as before
in his examinations to them in the casue LLewellin and company
against Powell

the marke of the sayd
Roger 'R' Escott [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before dorctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin
----
The 19th of October 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of George Bell Andrew Glen James)
Crawford Lewis Mounteth Thomas henderson George)
Wilson David Longlands David Mitchell Thomas)
Edwards Peter Steene and Richard ffalconer of)
Borestone in Scotland for the shipp the Noahs)
Arke otherwuse the Arke of which the ayd Richard)
ffalconer was Master and the tackle apparrell and)
furniture lately seized by the Pelican ffrigott)
whereof Captaine Mootham was Master)
Clements Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the
Claymers./

Rp.

1us

Richard ffawconer of Borowstones
in Scotland Master of the Shipp the Noahs
Arke otherwise the Arke aforesayd aged
forty yeares or thereabouts a witnesse
sworne and examined in this cause saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee well knoweth that the sayd George Bell Andrew Glen James
Cranford Lewis Monnteth Thomas henderson George Wilson david
Longland, david Mitchell Thomas Edwards ad Peter Stevenson
and hee this deponent during all the tyme arlate and ever since the
building of the sayd shipp the Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke arlate have
bin and are the true and lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the sayd
Shipp and her tackle apparell and furniture and soe comonly reputed
videlicet the sayd Bell Glen Crawford Monnteth henderson Wilson
Longland Mitchell Edwards and Stevenson every of them of one sixteenth
part thereof and this deponent of the other sixe sixteenth parts thereof And
this hee the better knoweth being Master of the sayd shipp and ever since
the building thereof in the yeare one thousand sixe hindred forty one
And saith that ever since her building the sayd shipp hath
belonged to Borostons in Scotland, And that all the Owners of
the sayd shipp were and are Scotland borne and Inhabitants of Scotland and dwelling in
Borostons aforesayd and other places neere adioyning thereto And
further to this article hee cannot depose./

To the second third fowerth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation hee saith
ande deposeth that hee this deponent being Master of the sayd shipp the Noahs
Arke a;ias Arke did sett saye therewith from Borowstone in Scotland
bound for Normer in Norway arlate on the first day of Aprill (old style)
and arived there in safety and laded his sayd shipp with deales and [?XX]
Tarr intending to transport the same to Glascoe but in her [?XX]
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.288r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day./ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of John Marquen [?Srotch] Merchant)
liveing in Glascoe in Scotland for all the ladeing)
taken aboard the shipp the Noahs Arke alias the)
Arke whereof Richard ffaulconer was and is)
Master seized and taken by the Pelican ffrigott)
whereof Captaine Mortham was Master)
Clements Budd)

Examined upon an Allegation on the behalfe
of the Claymer./

[?XXX]

Rp.

jus

Richard ffawconer of Borrowstones
in Scotland Master of the sayd shipp the
Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke' aged 40
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined in this cause saith and
deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.288v Annotate
debts then oweing to him there, And hee this deponent did alsoe procure [?moneys]
in holland and therewith bought and recovered his sayd shipp the Noahs Arkeof the dutch after her condemnation And presently after this deponent had
soe bought her the sayd Marquen did buy and cause to be laded aboard
the sayd Shipp the Arke for his owne use and Accompte all the severall
parcells of goods arlate videlicet 253 barrs of Iron two  great baggs of hopps twelvehundred pounds or thereabouts of Tarr tackle w65 holland [?slepes] of strong
water two dozen of black hatts one bagg of [?Toe] three ferkins of [?soape]
a ferkin of hackled fflxe and three reames of paper all which were by the
order and direction of the sayd Marquen to be by this deponent transported
to Normer in Norway And further to these articles hee canot depose/

To the third and 4th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith that hee this deponent with the shipp the
Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke arlate did according to such the direction
and appointment of the sayd Marquen sett sayle with all the goods and merchan
dizes predeposed

[ADD DATA]

To the last hee saith that his foregoeing depositions are true and further
hee cannot depose./

Richard Falconer [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as before
----
The same day

Upon an allegation in behalfe of the sayd claymeres/

The clayme of the sayd Bell and others for the shipp)
the Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke her)
tackle and furniture seized by the Pelican)
ffrigott
Clements Budd)

Rp.

2us

Alexander Allen of Borestone in Scotland
Mariner aged 38 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined sayth
and deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that  hee this deponent was Pilott of the sayd shipp the Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke [?XXX]
the safe stereing and carrying of her through the Islands of Scotland And
went in her the whole voyage in question, and hath knowne the sayd shipp
from her first building which was in the yeare of our Lord 164[?8]
which shee hath allwaies belonged and bin accompted to belong to
Borrestones in Scotland arlate and that hee well knoweth that the arlate
George
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.289v Annotate
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of the sayd John Marquen for)
for his goods in the Noahs Arke or the Arke)
Clements Budd)

Rp.

2us

Alexander Allen of Borestones in Scot
land Mariner aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a
wotnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet./

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that the shipp the Noahs Arke or the Arke was seized and carried into
Holland by the Spira Mundi arlate (the arlate Marinco de Clarke Master thereof
and
a great quantitie of deales and Tarr aboard the same which belonged to the
arlate Marquen and his Correspondents Colen Campbell and John [?PurXXX] [?XXXXX] livinge at Glascoe, and was in Holland both shipp
and goods condemned as lawfull prize to the States of Holland and there collected
up many debts which were owing to him And also saith that the arlate Richard
ffalconer did as hee beleeveth buy the sayd shipp the Noahs Arke of the Dutch after the
same was soe condemned and being againe possessed thereof the sayd Marquen
did casue to be laden on board the sayd shipp for his Accompte and the Accompte of his sayd Correspondents the severall
parcells of goods and merchandizes folowing videlicet two great baggs of hopps
253 barrs of Iron 12 hundred pounds at the least of tarr tackle two
hundred sixty five holland Stopes of strong water, some black hatts (but how many
hee knoweth not, one bagg of [?Toe], and about two ferkins and a halfe of soape
and one ferkin of [?heckled] fflax and three Reames of paper to be transported
to Normer in Norway for his and his sayd Correspondents Accomptes but saith hat in the course of the sayd
shipp the Arke from Holland to Normer in Norway aforesayd shee was
mett with by Captaine Mootham arlate in a ffrigott called the
Pellican and seized by him with all the forementioned goods and merchantdizes
on board her and brought up to London arlate

[ADD DATA]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of the sayd Bell and others for the shipp)
the Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke her tackle and)
furniture  seized by the Pelican ffrigott)
Clements Budd)

Rp.

3us

John ffaulconer of Borestones in
Scotland there borne aged 28 yeares or
thereabouts Boatswaine of the sayd shipp 
the Arke a witnes sworne and examined saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet/

To the first snd second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and
deposeth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.290r Annotate
deposeth that hee this deponent was Boatswaine of he shipp the Noahs Arke
or the Arke arlate durin ge whole voyage arlate, and hath knowne the sayd shipp from
the tyme of the first building thereof which was in the yeare of our Lord 1641
ever since which tyme shee hath belonged unto Borstones in Scotland arlate
and saith the arlate George Bell and alsoe Andrew Glen James Crawford Lewis
Monnteth Thomas Henderson George Wilson David Longlands David Mitchell Thomas
Edwards Peter Stevens in the sayd allegation named and the arlate Richard ffalconer
(who is also master of the sayd shipp) have during all the tyme arlate and ever since
the first building thereof bin comonly reputed the true and lawfull Owners and proprietors
of the sayd shipp Noahs Arke otherwise the Arke

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.290v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of the sayd John Marquen for his goods)
in the Noahs Arke or the Arke)
Clements Budd)

Upon the allegation on behalfe of the Claymer

'John ffalconer' of Borestones in Scotland
there borne aged 28 yeares or thereabouts
Boatswaine of the sayd shipp the Arke

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.291r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatory hee answereth and deposeth that hee this deponent was on board the
shipp the Noahs Arke Interrate when shee began her voyage from Borestones Interrate to
Norway and was boatswaine of her then and when shee was seized by the holland man of
warr predeposed of who was in the imediate service of the States Generall of the united
Provinces when hee seized the sayd shipp the Arke and saith the same was seized in the moneth
of May 1653 and was condemned in the Court of Admiralty for the Port of Rotterdam
And further hee cannot depose to this Interrogatory

[ADD DATA]

JOHN FALCONER [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as before
----
The sayd 'John ffalconer' to the Crosse Interrogatories
in the clayme of Bell and others for the shipp
the Noahs Arke aforesayd

[ADD DATA]


HCA 13/68 f.291v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Interrogatories/

In the clayme of Bell and others for the shipp the)
Noahs Arke et cetera.)

The sayd Richard ffaulconer/

[ADD DATA]

May last and upon or about the 12th day of that moneth and sentence of Adiudication 
and confiscation of the sayd shipp and goods on board her was given at the Admiralty
Court of Rotterdam in the moneth of June last but what day
hee remembreth not nor the name of the Jusge or Judges that gave the sayd
Sentence And further to this Interrogatory hee cannot depose/

[ADD DATA]

To the 4th hee saith that hee this deponent bought the shipp Interrogate of the procura=
tor fiscall of the Admiralty Court where the same was condemned, but what his
name is hee doth not at present remember and saith that hee this deponent paid to the sayd
procurator fiscall for the sayd shipp one hundred and fifty pounds
which money hee this deponent borrowed and tooke up part of it of
James Hamilton a Scotchman then in Hlland and the rest thereof of John
Marquen the claymer of the goods now on board the sayd shipp and [?XXXX]
Captaine and com[any of the Pelican ffrigott aforesayd and that there was noe bill of sale made of [?XXXX]
Shipp it not being the custome there to make bills of sale and further hee
cannot depose./

[ADD DATA]

Richard falconer [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as before
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.292r Annotate
FFF

The 29th day of November 1653.

On the behalfe of ffrancis Heath)
concerning the losse of the shipp)
named the Loyalty whereof one)
[?XXX] dunson was Master and the goods)
in her)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe of the
sayd ffrancis Heath.

.1.

Valentine Buggs of Wapping in thr County of Middlesex
Mariner aged32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth:-

[ADD DATA]

tradeing voyage to the East Indies
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.294r Annotate
The 30th day of November 1653.

On the behalfe of the Keepers of the Liberty)
of England by Authority of Parliament)
against the shipp Patriarke Jacob whereof)
Claes Colbrandt is Master and the goods in)
her. Budd)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe
of the sayd Keepers of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament

Rowe dt.

Claes Colbrandt of Hamburgh Mariner Master of
the sayd shipp the Patriark Jacob aged fifty yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Interrogatory this deponent saith that he was aboard the sayd shipp
att the tyme of her seizure, and was master of her and so hath bene
for theise five yeares last past and upwards, And saith he was borne att
Hamburgh under the Jurisdiction of the Lords the States there, and there
hath lived and kept his family theis ten yeares now past and upwards,
and came first there to dwell with his wife 25 yeares agoe, and
hath lived there bachiler and marryed man all his tyme. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatory This deponent saith that the sayd shipp att the tyme
of her being seized was bound for Hamburgh, and came last from the
Port of Cadiz in Spayne, and saith the sayd shipp being by a pasport or warrant from the honoroable the Counsell of State of this Commonwealth [?secure] [#)

[# LH MARGIN]
[?arranged] in that behalfe
[?XXXXX] this deponent
[?XXX] his sayd shipp
[?XX] tyme  of seizure
Claes Kolbarnt [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

began her outward or
last voyage to Cadiz from Haver de Grace in the moneth of May last past not for the accompt of her owners but being freighted by Monsieur
ffirminet of Roan in ffrance who laded aboard the sayd shipp 400
hundred packes of piece goods for which this deponent signed severall
bills of lading. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatory this deponent saith the goods carryed outwards
to Cadiz as aforesayd were 400. packes of peice goods or linnen Cloth but for whose Accompt the
same were hee knoweth not
and the sayd goods were consigned to Cadiz
to severall factors to whom this deponent delivered the same, but saith
he remembreth not the names of any of the sayd factors, and saith
the sayd shipp tooke in her sayd lading att Havre de Grace
in March last past, and sett sayle from thence in May
last past and from her such departure from Havre da Grace in the sayd month of May to this present tyme
hath bene onely att Cadiz and Plymouth where she now is and att now
other port. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth Interrogatory this deponent saith that the sayd shipp belongeth to
Hamburgh as to her property her owners being all of them Inhabitants
of Hamburgh, but saith she begann not her outwards voyage from
Hamburgh nor ever was there, but hath for three yeares now last
past bene trading to and fro in the straits. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the fifth Interrogatory This deponent saith that he this deponent by name Claes
Colbrandt is the present Master of the sayd shipp, and saith he was appoynted
Master of the sayd shipp about five yeares afoe att Hamburgh by
the present Owners thereof hereafter mentioned, and saith hee was the
first Master thereof. and hath two eighth parts and one sixteenth
part therein having bought the same, or payd for the same to the
timber masters who built the sayd shipp as hereafter is sett forth. And
otherwise saving his subsequent depositions he cannot depose.

To the sixth Interrogatory this deponent saith that the present Owners of the
sayd shipp were and are all of them Hamburghes and there now dwell
and have there lived all their tymes respectively being Natives of
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.294v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

the sayd
shipp was built att Amsterdam for the foresayd Owners, and this deponent
for and on the behalfe of the sayd Owners about the tyme of building
thereof which happened in the yeare of our Lord 1648 paid ten thousand
guilders for the hull of the sayd shipp to Mr Jacob Ravens and
Claus Ravens the Master builders, and for her tackle furniture and
other necessaryes the summe of about 14 thousand guilders to severall
persons of whom he did and could buy the same best Cheape, the
names of whom he remembrath not And otherwise cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.295r Annotate
To the tenth Interrogatory he saith that when the sayd shipp was seized all his
bills of lading aboardd his shipp were losse and put together in a box
in this deponents Chest, and none of them were inclosed in any letter or Cover
or directed to any one otherwise than by the consignement in the bodyes thereof
And saith he doth not know for whose severall Accompts the sayd sylver and
other goods belonging to merchants are any otherwise than by the bills
of lading aforesayd But saith himselfe had two small Chests of sugar
a small oarcell of raisins one bag of rice, a pipe or two of wine for his
owne Accompt. and about 600 pieces of eight for his shipps use and
acccompt. and this deponent had likewise for his accompt three small sylver
porringers aboard for which goods of this deponents and shipps Company
there was not any bills of lading. And otherwise cannot depose [#]

[#] [LH MARGIN]

[ADD DATA]

To the eleaventh Interrogatory This deponent saith he had not any purser aboard
butsaith that att the tyme of lading the goods and sylver belonging to
the merchants as aforesayd he caused a youth to enter in a little book the
respective parcells of goods and sylver as they came in and the sayd booke
is as he beleiveth amongst his papers found a shipboard. And he saith
by vertue of his oath that he beleiveth that the bills of lading that were
found in the sayd shipp doe agree as to the names of the parties to whom
the sayd goods and sylver doe are consigned and for whose Accompt they are laden with the
sayd little booke, but saith the names of the Laders are not entred in the
sayd booke it being not usuall to doe. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the twelfth Interrogatory This deponent saith that to the best of his Remembrance
he beganne to take in the goods aforesayd abord the 28th day of August last
past new stile, and began as he remembreth to take in sylver aboard his shipp
about the 5th day of October last past new stile, and finished the taking
in of the goods and sylver about the twentyeth day of October last past new stile
but for the more certainty of the premisses referrs himselfe to his bills of
lading aforesayd; and saith the woolls were laden and taken in day
by day as the barkes brought them aboard, and the copper in like sort
and the Campecha wood and other woods were laden att severall tymes, and the sylver
in like sort according as the factors and boatmen could make their best
opportunityes to doe the same but the particular dayes of the ladeing
of every severall parcell he cannot sett forth. And further or
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 13th Interrogatory he saith he hath heard that it is prohibited and unlawfull
for all persons whatsoever to lade any money plate bullion or sylver att Cadiz
in Spaine to be transported from thence except the same be first entred
and Registred and a License obteyned for lading and transporting of the
same, but whether it be so prohibited indeed not knowing the Lawes of
Spaine nor having seene any such law or prohibition executed or
putt in are against such as have laded sylver and moneyes, he saith he
knoweth not And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 14th Interrogatory he saith he doth not know that every man that ladeth any
moeny or sylver att Cadiz without Registring the same and obteyning
license for carrying it from thence doth loose his propriety therein. And
further cannot depose.

To the fifteeneth Interrogatory he saith that part of the sylver now seized videlicet
the foresayd 600 peices of eight, doth belong to the foresayd owners of the
sayd shipp and 200 peices of 9/7 now likewise seized in the sayd shipp
belong to this deponent. And saith that for all the sylver and moneyes aboard
the sayd 600. and 200 peices of 8/8 excepted this deponent hath signed bills
of lading. And otherwise cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.295v Annotate
To the sixteenth Interrogatorry This deponent saith he hath bene the onely master
of the sayd shipp from her first building, and hath made three voyages
to Cadiz before this but never carryed any sylver aboard before
this voyage some small quantities for the shipps use and the use of
Passengers excepted. But saith he never made any voyage from
Cadiz to Amterdam Middleburgh or any other port within the Jurisdiction
of the States if the United Provinces nor did he ever discharge any
sylver att them or any of them. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the seventeenth Interrogatorry he saith the goods now seized #

[# LH MARGIN, AT 90 DEGREES]
are not the proceed of the goods which were by
this deponent carryed to Cadiz as aforesayd, which
he knoweth for that the sayd outward goods
were not sold when this deponent receyved in
the goods now in question, those sayd outwards
goods being as e heard designed for the
Indies. And further of his knowledge
to this Interrogatory he cannot depose.
Class Kalabrant [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN, AT 90 DEGREES]

[ADD DATA]

To the eighteenth Interrogatorry, This deponent saith there belongeth to the
sayd shipp 32 or 34 person men and boyes or thereabouts, and
saith that about five or six of them are ffrench men , and beleiveth
that all the rest are Hamburghers, Luebeckers and Swedes, and
people or natives of the Eastland Cittyes, and doth not know that any
of them was or is a subiect of the States of the United Provinces.
And saith the steersman of the sayd shipp being of Holsteyne, and his
boatswayne a Danzycker, and one Jacob, a ffrench man or Genoese came
first aboard the sayd shipp at Malaga, and all the rest of his shipps
company came first aboard at Havre de Grace. And further he
saith he cannot depose saving that there was not any Merchant or
Sopra Cargo aboard his sayd shipp this voyage.

Class Kalabrant [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

H. Favell Notary Publique

Repeated before the Judges
in Court
----
the second day of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Arnold Woulters of Hamburgh)
for his sylver laden in the shipp the Angell)
Michael whereof John Low is Master taken)
by Captaine John Bonner and Companie)
in the Marmaduke frigot, whereof the)
sayd John Bonner is Captaine Budd ffranklin)
Suckley)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd Arnold Woulters

ffranklin dt.

1.

Juan Motte of Sevilia in Spaine
merchant aged thirty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or
about the moneth of November 1652. the sayd Arnold Woulters did by his
factor or Agent lade and putt aboard the arlate shipp the Angell Michael
whereof the sayd John Low was Master) then lyeing before Saint Lucars
in the dominions of the King of Spaine two baggs No. 1. 2. conteyning
in them 398 peices of 8/8 more or lesse old and new and two little
packes No. 3. 4. of wrought and melted plate weighing sixty seven
markes or 33. li and 1/2 more or lesse and being of the Cleare value of
six hundred and thirty peices of eight of Mexico or Sevill moneys
amounting together with the foresayd baggs of money to one thousand
twenty eight peices of eight more or lesse, and marked as in the
margent and sealed to be in the sayd shipp transported and carryed from the
sayd Port of Saint Lucar to Hamburgh for the Accompt and risgoe of
him the sayd Arnold Woulters and there to be delivered to him the
sayd Arnold Woulters or his Assignes for his use, which he knoweth
to be true being present aboard the sayd shipp, and seeing the sayd plate and
moneyes laden for the Accompt aforesayd att the tyme of the lading
thereof. And moreover saith that he the sayd Arnold Woulters in the
sayd moneth of November and tyme of lading the sayd money and [?XXXX]
and continually since and was, and is and ought to be the lawfull owner
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.296r Annotate
and Proprietor of the sayd respective parcells of moneyes and plate
which he knoweth for that the same were and are the proceed of the producents owne goods linnen Cloth and other Commodities which
the producent sent from Hamburgh to his factor who laded the sayd
sylver and plate. And otherwise saving his subsequent depositions
he saith he cannot depose.

To the second Article of the sayd allegation and to the bill of lading therein
mentioned to be exhibited and nowe shewne to him this Examinat he saith
That after the lading of the foresayd parcells of meoneys and plate
in manner aforesayd the arlate John Low master of the sayd shipp did
in the port of Saint Lucar aforesayd in the presence and sight of this deponent
signe or firme three bills of lading all of one tenor for the same
And saith that two of the sayd bills were left at Saint Lucar with the
factor who did lade the sayd moneys and plate, and one of them came
along with the sayd sylver, and being found aboard att the tyme of
the seizure of the sayd shipp was as he hath heard sent into the Registry
of this Court, And saith that the bill of lading in this article sayd to
be exhibited and now shewne him is one of the sayd bills of lading which
this deponent saw firmed as aforesayd, And the same was and is true and
not colourable, which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the thirdand 3th Articles of the sayd allegation

[ADD DATA]

To the fifth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
sayd Arnold Woulters was and is an Hamburgher borne and for such
Commonly accounted this deponent himselfe being a native of the same place
And further saith that the sayd Arnold Woulters in the sayd moneth of November 1652
and att the tyme of the lading of the sayd sylver and money respectively
as aforesaid and for six yeares before or thereabouts was and is an
Inhabitant of Hamburgh. and that for about 11 yeares next before he
lived in Sevilia in Spayne as a merchant stranger this deponent
being his servant and Cashier for the greatest part of the sayd 11
yeares. And that the producent for about 6 or 7 yeares last past hath
bene and is  Burgher of Hamburgh, and for all his tyme hath bene
and is a subiect of the free State of Hamburgh and so accounted. And
further cannot depose

To the sixth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that having
bene in his youth bredd upp in the way of merchandizing under the sayd
producent as aforesayd, and having since continually had and kept correspondence
with him doth thereby know, that the sayd Arnold Woulters for these 16 or
17
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.296v Annotate
or 17 yeares last past and doth drive a constant trade betwixt
Hamburg and Saint Lucar and Cadiz and other ports of Spaine for
sylver and other merchandizes, and that for diverse yeares ;ast
past severall merchandizes have been exported from Hamborough
to Sain Lucar and other places in Spaine and there delivered for the
Accompt of the sayd Arnold Woulters And otherwise he
cannot depose

To the last he saith his depositions are true. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

Juan Motte [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

See him after the next witnes
videlicet after Stedman
----
The third day of december 1653.

Lewellen Austin and others against Powerr. [?XX]

Examined upon the sayd allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Powell.

4

Richard Stedman of Blackwall in the County of
Middlesex Shipwright late Carpenter aboard the
shipp the Hopewell aged 29 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth.

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation this deponent 
saith that the arlate Captaine Henry Powell was master and [partowner?] of the sayd shipp the Hopewell [?on the] voyage in question, and was so appointed by her owners the arlate Lewellen Ausin and Companie
did [?] and promise one eighth part of the cargazone on the [onboard/ outward?] lading
proportional to [it?] in [?] in the shippe being an eighth part [?] the forsayd shipp being in pledge for

[ADD DATA]


HCA 13/68 f.299r Annotate
Arnold Wouter/.

The sayd Juan Motte To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

Row dt.

To the 1. negatively

To the second and third and 4th Interrogatories he hath knowne the sayd Arnold  Woulters 22 yeares or
thereabouts. and otherwise negatively the producent being not in Spayne
but att Hamburgh the tyme interrate, saving that the producents
howse is by the Muren in hamburgh. and saving his foregoeing
depositions.

The .5.th he saith that the name of the factor that did lade the sayd sylver
was and is Claus or Nicholas Janson an Hamburgher borne, and the sayd
sylver and moneyes was laden in the day tyme and receyved aboard by the
sayd Captaine John Low himselfe.

To the .6.th he saith the sayd bills of lading were signed by the sayd Low a ship board
about the 26th day of November 1652. in the presence and sight of this Rendent.

To the 7. and 8th. Interrogatories he saith he is sure that the sayd moneyes and plate
were laden by the party whom the bill of lading mentioneth to have laden the
same to wit the sayd Claes Janson. and further cannot depose.

To the .9. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 10. negatively to every part thereof.

To the 11. 12. and .13. Interrogatoryes This Rendent saith that about November 1652 being att Saint Lucar
in the howse of the sayd Claes Janson he shewed there unto this deponent
severall quantities of Cottons linnen Cloth, and other goods which
he told this Rendent he had received for the producents Accompt from
Hamburgh and withall shewed this deponent att the same tyme the
producents order or letter of advise to him touching the same which
by the handwriting thereof this Rendent well knew to be done by the producents owne
hadn writing bene his servant and Cashier as aforesayd and therein the
sayd Janson was ordered to returne the proceed of the sayd goods in
plate as they should be putt off and convenient shipping happen, and
the sayd Janson likewise told this Rendent that he had sold part of the producents
goods in the sayd letter mentioned and that the sylver (which is now in question)
then designed to be laden aboard the sayd John Low was the proceed thereof.

To the 14 he saith the sayd Claes Janson the lader of the sayd sylver and
moneyes did acquaint this Rendent for whose Accompt the same was laden
and who was to beare the Adventure thereof, videlicet the producent as aforesayd.

To the .15. he saith he is by birth an Hamburgher and an Inhabitant of
Sevilia in Spaine. and is the producents Cousin german. and otherwise
negatively having noe manner of Interest in the sayd plate

To the .16. he saith the sayd plate and moneyes were bought and procured by the
sayd Claes Janson as he beleiveth for the reasons aforesayd but of whom when
or where or how he bought the same not being present att the buying thereof
he cannot depose. But saith the producent is as he assuredly beleiveth
the true and sole owner thereof for the reasons aforesayd whereto he
referreth himselfe. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 17. 18. 19. and 20th. Interrogatories he saith he cannot depose.

To the 21th. he saith he knoweth the foresayd bill of lading to be one onf the
foresayd bills of lading which this Rendent saw signed att Saint Lucars aforesayd
by the marke seale contents and firme thereof and by the filling up thereof
which was and is done with the proper handwriting of the sayd Claes Janson
with whose Character he is well acquainted. And further cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.299v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The third day of december 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers of the Liberty of England)
by Authority of Parliament against the shipp)
the Crowne Imperiall whereof)
Hans Meynerson is Master) Budd ffrancklin)

1.

Captaine Joachim Benn of Hamburgh aged 34
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
arlate shipp the Crowne Imperiall whereof Hans Meynerson was
and is master being built att Serdam by the order and for
the use and reckoning of the alate Wilkin Wrede and Company
all Hamburghers was by the sayd Hans Meynerson about the
moneth of Aprill 1653 last past brought from Serdam  to the
Port of Hamburgh under the Command of the sayd Hans
Meynerson the premisses he knoweth for that he saw the sayd
shipp in the River of Elve and sayd Port of Hamburgh upon
or about the twentyeth day of the sayd month of Aprill 1653
last past, and did understand by the sayd Meynerson and others taking
notice of her as a new ship that she was some few dayes before
arrived there from Serdam as aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.300r Annotate
to the sayd Port of Hamburgh and for a shipp so belonging was att
Hamburgh in Aprill May and June last past commonly accounted reputed
and taken.

To the third Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp was as he beleiveth fitted and furnished by and for the
Owners thereof hereafter mentioned att Hamburgh. which he
beleiveth for that he left the sayd shipp att Hamburgh and knoweth
that provisions and men might more easily and att better rates
be provided and hired att Hamburgh then elsewhere thereabouts. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth Article  of the sayd allegation he saith he hath credibly heard
that the shipp Crowne Imperiall aforesaid sett syle from Hamburgh
in the moneth of July 1653 last past and sayled in Company with
other Hamburgh shipps and arrived att Cadiz in Augsut last past
and that shee is now bound directly for Hamburgh there to discharge comeing directly
from Cadiz under the Command of the sayd Hans Meynerson

To the fifth and sixth he saith that the arlate Wilkin Wred[?e] Lodwick
Vernalen, Otto Holmers, Tobias Hamman Didrack Roopke, Peter
Van doome ffrans Meynke, Hans Young Hendrick M[?amma] and
the sayd hans Meynerson the Owners of the sayd shipp are persons
all well knowne to this deponent, and this deponent did understand
before he left or last came from hamburgh in June last as aforesaid aswell by themselves being many of them of his speciall acquaintance
as by others that they were the lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp
and for such were and are att Hamburgh then Accounted And saith the
foresaid persons were and are all Hamburgers, and every one of them was and
is a Hamburgher and a Burgher and Inhabitant of Hamburgh and
a subiect of the free State of Hamburgh and so accounted, which he
knoweth being himselfe an Inhabitant and Burgher of Hamburgh
And noe one of the sayd parties was or is an Hollander or a subiect
of the States of the United Provinces or ffrench King or of any or eyther
of them nor so accounted so farr as this deponent knoweth beleiveth or
hath heard And otherwise cannot depose saving that the sayd Hans
Meynerson was and is Master of the sayd shipp and so accounted and
was appoynted so to be by the Owners aforesayd, and somuch this deponent
saw and well observed before his comeing from Hamburgh in June last
the sayd Meynerson being then in the possession of the sayd shipp as Master
for and on the behalfe and in the name of the foresayd Owners. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. Interrogatory he saith he was borne at Hamburgh and there hath
lived with his wife nyne yeares and there now hath his wife Children and
family. and there Bachiler and marryed man hath lived all his tyme
and otherwise negatively having noe relation to any of the sayd parties, nor interest
in the sayd shipp or goods. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 2 he saith he was last att Hamburgh upon the 16th day of June last
past and came from thence the same day and moneth and was there in the
moneth of Aprill last. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith he doth not know that Hans Meynerson did pay 8500. Gilders
or any other summe att Serdam to the builders of the sayd shipp. nor knoweth
where he procured such money nor saw him pay it. but saith he credibly
heard att Hamburgh that the foresayd Owners did buy or cause the sayd
shipp to be bought for their owne use and Accompt att Serdam. And
otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

J[?XXX] [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.300v Annotate
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

2)

Captaine Joachim Warner of Hamburgh master
of the John Baptista aged 46 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent sayeth
that he this deponent knoweth well the arlate shipp the Crowne Imperial
Hans Meynerson Master and so hath done from the moneth of Aprill last
past and saith  the sayd shipp is a new shipp and by common repute
was built att Serdam by order and for the accompt of the present owners thereof
hereafter mentioned and that he this deponent was att Hamburgh in
the moneth of Aprill last past 1653. and then sawe the sayd shipp arrive in
ballast from Holland att the sayd Port of Hamburgh under Command of the
sayd Hans Meynerson who came in her and anchored his shipp by the side of this deponents shipp the John Baptista and saith he knoweth and saw
the sayd shipp did remayne and abide in the River of Elve and sayd
Port of Hamburgh neere about three moneths before she sett sayle
from thence that is to say from the sayd moneth of Aprill untill the
moneth of July then next ensueing lying anchored all the sayd tyme by the side of this deponents shipp And saith that the sayd shipp in
the sayd monethes did and now doth belong to the sayd Port of hamborough, and
for a shipp to the sayd Port belonging in Aprill May June and July last
past 1653, was att Hamburgh commonly accounted reputed and taken
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 3. and 4 Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp whilest she lay att the sayd Port of Hamburgh in the sayd River of Elve
was furnished victualled manned and fitted att Hamburgh to sea upon a voyage for
Cadiz in Spaine by the sayd Meynerson att the Cost of his Owners the
arlate Wilkin Wrede and Companie, and that the saud shipp in the
sayd moneth of July last past sett sayle and departed out of the sayd
River of Elve and from the sayd Port of Hamburgh in Company of
this deponents shipp the Saint John Baptist and five other Hamburgh
shipps all bound for Spayne, this deponent being attt Hamburgh when
the Crowne Imperiall was so fitted for the sayd voyage and saw her provisions and [?men] putt on board in the name of her Owners hereafter mentioned and saith the
sayd shipp Crowne Imperiall under Command of the sayd Meynerson and [?XXX]
sayd shipp John Baptist under Command of this deponent sett sayle together
as aforesayd from the Elva and continued sayling together with the sayd
other shipps for Spaine till they made the Cape of Saint Vincent and
there this deponent shipp shaped and made her Course to Malaga
whither she was bound, and the Crowne Imperiall aforesayd of this
deponents sight made her direct Course for Cadiz whither she was
bound, and wheere as this deponent hath credibly heard and beleiveth
she arrived safely in August last past, and there having taken in
her lading for Hamburgh sett sayle directly for Hamburgh,
whither she now is bound as he hath credibly heard to discharge and
deliver her lading. And otherwise he cannot depose./

To the fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the sayd Hans Meynerson was and is Master of the sayd shipp and was
so appoynted by his Owners hereafter mentioned and sayled in the [?XXX]
from Hamburgh as aforesayd. And further that the arlate Wilkin Wrede
Lodowick
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.301r Annotate
Lodwick Vermalen Otto Holmers Tobias Hamman Didrack or dirick
Roopk Peter Van doome ffrans Meynck, Hans [?Vonns], Henrick Momma
and the sayd Hans Meynerson were and are Owners of the sayd shipp and [so accounted] well knowne to this deponent
And the were and are all of them Hamburghers, that is to say Inhabitants
and Burghers of Hamburgh and subiects of the ffree State of Hamburgh
for these twenty yeares last past and upward. and every one of them
was and is a Burgher and Inhabitant of Hamburgh and a subiect of the
sayd State and so accounted. And not one of them was or is a subiect of
the States of the united Provinces or ffrench King so farr as this
deponent knoweth or beleiveth or ever heard, being himselfe an
Hamburgher borne and having had long and particular knowledge of the
sayd parties. And otherwise cannot depose, saving that the sayd Meynerson was
in Aprill May June and July att Hamburgh [?XXX] of the sayd shipp in the name of and for
the Owners.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first he saith he was borne att Hamburgh and there hath lived all
his tyme and hath his wife and Children there. and saith he is noe way
related to any of the Owners of the sayd shipp nor hath any Interest eyther
in the sayd shipp or goods or any or eyther of them or any part of eyther of
them. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2 Interrogatory he saith he was in Hamburgh in the moneth of Aprill 1653.
interrate being Aprill last past, and was last there in the month of July
aforesayd in which moneth he came from thence as aforesayd. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .3. Interrogatory he saith he saw not any money told or payd for the
sayd shipp to the builders thereof nor knoweth how much was payd for it
nor by whom or where it was payd or where procured. But saith he heard
the sayd Wilkin Wrede and others of the sayd Owners say and declare upon
the Exchange att Hamburgh that they videlicet the foresayd Owners had bought
and payd for the sayd shipp. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Jochim warner [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The fifth day of December 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3.

Captaine Morrens Morrenson of Hamburgh Master
of the Hope of Hamburgh aged 46. yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first and second and third Article sof the sayd allegation This deponent saith That
he knoweth well the arlate shipp the Crowne Imperiall Hans Meynerson
Master having sayled in Company with her from Hamburgh to the Coasts
of Spaine this last summer, And saith being with his owne shipp the
Hope att Hamburgh in April last past 1653. he then and there saw thee
sayd shipp the Crowne Imperiall arrive in the sayd River of Elve in her ballast under Comand
of the sayd Hans Maynerson who then sayd he brought her from Holland
where she was built and bought as he then sayd by or for himselfe and
his Owners, who are hereafter mentioned, and saith being come up as
aforesayd to the said Port she tooke her birth neere to this deponents sayd
shipp and so lay by her in the sayd River for three monethes and
upwards videlicet till July then next following of the sight of this deponent
who saw the sayd shipp within the sayd tyme victuallyd manned and furnished
to sea upon a voyage for Spaine by and in the name and att the
Cost of the sayd Wilkin Wrede,Hans Mejnerson and Company
all Hamburghers hereafter particularly mentioned And further cannot depose
saving that the sayd shipp did and doth belong to Hamburgh and was and is so accounted.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.301v Annotate
To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp the
Crowne Imperiall being so victualled and manned did in the month of
July last past 1653. sett sayle and depart out of the River of
Elve from the Port of Hamburgh in Companie of this deponents
sayd shipp the Hope and John Baptista the shipp pf his precontest
Joachim Warner and four other Hamburgh shipps for Spaine
and saith they all sayled together to the Coast of Spaine videlicet till they
made the Cape Saint Vincent, and there  this deponent saw the
sayd Crowne Imperiall under Commannd of the sayd meynerson
shape and take  her Course directly for cadiz whither she was
bound, and this deponent and the rest of the sayd shipps being bound
for Mallaga went thither And he hath credibly heard that the
Crowne Imperiall arrived att Cadiz in August last past, and that
she there tooke in her lading and from thence is now directly bound
for Hamburgh there to discharge and that she was to sayle to Cadiz and returne from
thence with her lading to Hamburgh Thi deponent credibly heard
before his comeing from Hamburgh in July last as aforesayd.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd
Hans Maynerson was and is by common repute a Native of Hamburgh
and there hath lived all his tyme, and saith he was and is a Burgher
and Inhabitant of Hamburgh and hath his wife and family
there living, which this deponent knoweth being himselfe a Burgher
of the same place and there likewise borne. And saith of his ceteyne
knowledge and sight the sayd meynerson went or came in Julky last from Hamburgh
in the sayd shipp Crowne Imperiall Master of her and was so
appoynted by the sayd Wrede and Company all Hamburghers And
further cannot depose

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd Wilkin
Wrede Lodwick Vermalen, Otto Holmers Tobias Heamman Dirick [?RyXXX]
Peter van doome ffrans Meyncke, Hans Younge and Hendrick Momma
being together with the sayd Hans Meynerson Owners of the sayd shipp
were and are all and every of them Burghers and Inhabitants of 
Hamburgh and every one of them was and is a subiect of the free
State of Hamburgh and so accounted, they being all of them
very well and particularly knowne to this deponent being himselfe
an Hamburgher as aforesayd: And saith the sayd parties nor any of
them were oor are subiects of the States of the United Provinces
nor ffrench King, nor so accounted so farr as this deponent ever [?heard]
or beleiveth. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1 Interrogatory he saith he was borne at Hamburgh and there hath
lived all his tyme. and saith he hath noe relation of kindred or [?service]
to any of the foresayd owners, nor hath any Interest in the sayd shippes and
goods interrogate. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2. he saith he came last from Hamburgh in the month of July last
past, and was there in Aprill last as aforesayd

To the 3. he saith he knoweth not what moneyes were payd by the sayd
Hans Meynerson for the sayd shipp nor where nor when nor did he see
any payd nor knoweth where the money was procured, but saith hee hath
credibly heard att Hamburgh that the foresayd Owners did by the sayd Hans Meynerson
buy and pay for the sayd shipp in Holland where shee was built And
further cannot depose

Repeated with his precontests
before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin)

[?XXXXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.302r Annotate
The fifth day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Pickering against certaine goods)
in the shipp the Castle Rammekins/)

Examined upon the sayd allegation in the second place
on the behalfe of the sayd Pickering.

3

John Crosse of the parish of Saint Marke London merchant
aged 60 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet./

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the goods in
this cause Claymed by the sayd Timothy Gray and since by authority of this
Court appriased were att the tyme of the unlading thereof respectively
marked with the respective markes mentioned in the margent of the sayd
Appraisement, the premisses he knoweth for that he was present and aboard
the sayd shipp Castle Rammekins att the tyme of unladeing the sayd goods
respectively, and likewise att the tyme of appraising them and making
and draweing upp the sayd appraisement, and had the sayd goods under
his Custody from the tyme of unlading the same to the tyme of their
appraisement and thereby knoweth the premisses to be true  of his certaine
knowledge and tight, and that neyther att the tyme of unlading the
sayd goods nor afterward to the tyme of drawing upp the sayd apprisement
any new markes were made upon the sayd goods or any of them. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article he saith he cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatory he saith he comes to be examined in this cause att the
request of Mr Alexander Hatchet. and saith he favoureth no the parties
in this cause one before the other but favoureth Justice indifferently and
were it in his power would give the victory to him that hath best right. And
otherwise negatively.

To the second Interrogatory he saith he did not heare the sayd Gray saye the sayd goods
were prize, but saith he heard him say, that his goods were without markes,
and that the sayd goods appraised though they were marked and though
they were not his, yet should be his or that he would have them in stead
of his or to that effect. And the sayd words were spoken in the ware
house att Porters key where the sayd goods lay in the presence of this Rendent
and his precontest, Mr Primat, and Mr Aldwyn. and of the brother of
the foresayd Gray and about or a little or before noone of the day of appriasement
but the certaine day and month remembreth not. but therein referreth
himselfe to the sayd appraisement abiding as he beleiveth in the Registry
of this Court. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d. Interrogatory negatively for his part.

To the 4th. Interrogatory he saith he was none of the apprizers of the sayd goods
but saith he had possession of the sayd goods in the warehouse aforesayd both
before and after the sayd appriasement videlicet till such tyme as they were
sold by order of this Court, and then this Rendent delivered the same to the
Buyer thereof, a gentleman whose name he taketh to be Josiah Primat.
And further cannot depose.

To the .5.th Interrogatory he saith he bought not any of the goods interrate.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes in the second place./

To the sayd Interrogatories he saith that he hath knowne the sayd Timothy Gray about
four monethes, and first saw him the 11th day of August last past, and that
he is a man of middle stature and about 50 yeares of age as this Rendent
conceyveth, but remembreth not perfectly the colour of his haire and saith
he is not any of the Company of the [?2. sisters] nor hath deposed to the effect
interrate And otherwise cannot depose.//

John Crosse [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before 
[?Doctor] Clarke and Doctor Godolphin/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.302v Annotate
The sixth day of december 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Gilbert Keate Thomas Jennings and Company)
against a 16th part of the shipp the Prosperous)
and of her Tackle furniture and)
Apparrell lately belonging to dixewell)
Brent did attached by Authority of this)
Courtm and against whatsoever freight)
due for the same and against [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Brent)
the Administrator of all and singular)
the goods Chattells and debts of the sayd
dixwell Brent not administred)
by [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Brent the father and Administrator)
of the sayd dixwell Brent in particular)
and all others in generall. Smith)

Captaine Richard Ell of Twickenham
in the County of Middlesex Esquire aged
54 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet./

To the first article of the sayd alleagtion This deponent saith That in orabout
the latter end of the yeare 1648. or beginning of the yeare 1649 the
tyme otherwise he remembreth not, hee this deponent did att Smirna
deliver divers goods wares and merchandises in tinn Cloth pepper
and other things to the value of 480 li sterling and upwards to the sayd dixwell Brent
then being att Smirna to and for the use and accompt of the arlate
Gilbert Keat Thomas Jennings and Companie. And the sayd dixwell
Brent in his life tyme had and receyved the same upon
the sayd accompt and promised to dispose of the same to and for the best
benefit and advantage of them the sayd Gilbert Keat Thomas Jennings
and Companie, and to give an Accompt of the same or of the proceed
thereof to them or some of them, or their Agents. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
yeares aforesayd and att the tyme of the sayd attachment made of the
sayd 1/16th part of the sayd shipp the foresayd dixwell Nrent was in debt
unto the sayd Gilbert Keat Thomas Jenings and Company in the anount
of four hundred and eighty pounds sterling and upwards for the foresayd
goods wares and merchndizes so by hom receyved as aforesayd from
the sayd dixwell Brent deceased in his life tyme nor any other for
his part and behalfe since his death hath made any payment or
satisfaction. And saith that the sayd dixwell Brent in his life tyme
and not long before his death did severall tymes by letters and
othewise acknowledge the sayd debt to him this deponent who hath
delivered the sayd goods to him att Smirna as aforesayd. And otherwise
cannot depose.

Richard Ell [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The second day of December 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Adrian Death of Saint Lawrence parish [?XX]
merchant aged 27 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth.

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
about the beginning of the yeare of our Lord 1649. the tyme of daye
att present he remembreth not there were of the sight and knowledge of
this deponent severall parcells of Tinn Cloth pepper and other
merchandizes of the value of three hundred pounds lawfull English
money and upwards delivered att Smyrna by the arlate Captaine Richard Ell
his Precontest to the said Dixwell Brent who [?XXXX]
in his lfetyme, but is since departed this life. And saith [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.303r Annotate
goods were so delivered and receyved to and for the use and accompt
of the sayd Gilbert Keat Thomas Jennings and Company, to whom
or some of them or their Assignes the sayd dixwell Brent
promised and undertooke to give an Accompt thereof
or of the proceed thereof to and for the benefit and Aadvantage of this
the sayd Keat Jennings and Company. And this deponent saith
that he never heard nor knoweth that the sayd dixwell Brent did
his life tyme or any other in his behalfe since his death ever give
an Accompt of the sayd goods or proceed thereof to the sayd Mr Keat
Mr Jennings and Company or any of them, but saith that for ought
this deponent knoweth or hath heard the estate of the sayd dixwell
Brent or his Executors or Administrators are still lyable to accompt for the
sayd goods and to make satisfaction to the true value thereof being
300 li sterling as aforesayd and upwards, to them the sayd Gilbert Keat
Thomas Jennings and Company. And otherwise cannot depose.

Adrian Death [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3)

Peter Maret of Redriffe in the County of Surrey
Mariner aged 26. yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that being att Smirna in or about the latter end of the year 1648. or
bginning of the yeare 1649. not otherwise att present remembring the
tyme he then and there saw severall quantityes of goods tinn
Cloth pepper and other merchandises delivered to the arlate dixwell
Brent then residing att Smirna by the order of the sayd Richard
Ell to and for the Accompt of the sayd Gilbert Keat Thomas
Jennings and Company, which goods were of the value of betwixt
four and five hundred pounds and were receyved by the sayd Dixwell
Brent in his life tyme, and he was to accompt for the same or
the proceed thereof to the sayd Mr Keat Mr Jennings and Company
or some of them for their advantage and benefit, and so much
the sayd Mr dixwell Brent undertooke and promised to doe. And saith
the sayd Mr dixwell Brent is since departed this life, and never did
in his life tyme so farr as this deponent knoweth or hath heard make
or give any accompt of or for the sayd goods, nor any for him or
on his behalfe since his death so afar as this deponent knoweth. in
regard whereof his estate or his Executors or Administrators
are for ought this deponent knoweth to the Contrary debitors to the
sayd Gilbert Keat Thomas Jennings and Company for the
sayd goods or the proceed threof. And otherwise or further
he cannot depose.

Peter Marett [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontests)
before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin.)
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.303v Annotate
The eighth day of December 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4

ffrancis Duncombe of Cornhill London
merchant aged 25 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith there were
about the latter end of the yeare 1648. or beginning of the yeare
1649. the tyme otherwise att present he remembreth not, severall goods
and merchandizes to say Tinn, broad Cloath pepper and other
things of a goods value left or delivered at Smirna by the
arlate Richard Ell to and with the sayd Dixwell Brent
for the use and Accompt of the sayd Gilbert Keat Thorny Jennings
and Company, and the sayd Dixwell Brent residing then at
Smirna

[ADD DATA]
----
The 24th day of december 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Phillips and Company against the shipp the)
Saint Peter (whereof Daniel Stratman is master))
and against duart Nunez da Costa, Tunis)
Smith and others comeing in for their Interest)
Smith ffrancklin)

Examined upon the allegation of duart
da Costa, Tunis Smith and others.

Daniel Stratman of Hamburgh
Mariner Master of the sayd shipp the

Saint Peter aged 37 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined and
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.304r Annotate
To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that att the tyme
of the taking and surpriseing of the sayd shipp the Saint Peter by the arlate
Captaine Harrington and Company in a Caper or private man of warr
belonging to the sayd Captaine Phillips which happened upon o about
the 28th day of October 1653 last past, there were then on board the
sayd shipp about 27 or 28 bills of lading which did concerne the
present lading of the sayd shipp being the very true reall and originall
bills of lading for the sayd shipps cargazon of goods now in question
And more particularly saith that amongst the rest there was one
or more bill or bills of lading for some Chests or Chest of sugar

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

of the first marke in the margent, and allso one or more bills of bill

[SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

of lading for one or more Chest or Chests of sugar of the
second marke in the margent. And allso one or more bills or bill
of lading for one or more Chests or Chest of sugar of the

[THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

third marke in the margent, all which this deponent did himselfe
subscribed with his owne hand and name and had them in his power
and possession att the tyme of seizure in a little nett. And
moreover saith that the tyme aforesayd there were likewise aboard the
sayd shipp two sea Breifes or Letters Testimoniall or Certificates
concerning the sayd shipp and sealed with the seale of the Citty
of Hamburgh which were likewise in this deponents possession and
putt or disposed of in a little Tinn box. And further saith that
upon the seizure aforesayd he this deponent being commannded aboard the
sayd Caper carryed the sayd bills of lading and seabreifes together
with the rest of his papers that were in the Saint Peter, out of her
and arrived with the same in his boat aboard the sayd Harringtons
shipp; and there this deponent being required so to doe did
deliver all the sayd writings and particularly the sayd 27 or 28 bills
of lading and the sayd two seabreife into the hands of the sayd Harrington
Captaine or Commannder of the sayd private man of warr, and he receyved them
out of this deponents hand, and read and perused or seemed to reade
and peruse some of them in this deponents presence, and afterwards
putt or disposed of the same to witt the sayd bills of lading and seabreifes
in his owne Cabin being the great Cabin of the sayd privat man of warr
this deponent being present when the same where so disposed of. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath by
himselfe and by others his freinds as Master of the sayd shipp Saint Peter made
enquiry in the sayd Registry of this Court for the sayd bills of lading and
Seabriefes, and saith that so farr as he can hitherto find or discover
the sayd Harrington and his Company or any of them have not since the
sayd seizure brought into the Registry of this Court any of the bills of
lading for the forsayd goods or sugars particularly specifyed under the
foresayd markes nor any of the sayd sea breifes nor any more or other f the
sayd bills of lading eight onely excepted. but do still keepe and
deteyne the same as he beleiveth And otherwise he cannot depose.

daniel straetman [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

[?XXXXX to X Crosse]
[?XXXXXX in] 'H.H.H.'
[?XXX] the latter end
[?XXXXXX the XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.304v Annotate
The 13th day of December 1653

The Claime of Henry Baldero et cetera)

Suckly dt

2

John Mardy of Spraughton in the County of
Suffolke merchant aged 36. yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for
diverse yeares last past there hath bene an English Companie of
Merchant Adventurers resident in the Citty of Roterdam, and that
the arlate Henry Baldero for about ten yeares of the knowledge
of this deponent (who being his kinsman lived in howse with him
att Rotterdam) hath bene one of the sayd Company, and hath beene
for some tyme now past, and att present is the Treasurer
of the sayd Company, and for and as such commonly accounted, as
this deponent hath credibly heard and beleivethy. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 2. and 3. articles of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he never
heard that trade and Commerce was or is prohibited betweene
the people of England and people of the United Netherland Provinces
nor that the English are by the Supreme power of this Nation
commannded to withdrawe themselves out of the Dominions of the
States of the United Provinces, nor to hold correspondency with
them. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article he saith he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first he saith he comes to be a witnes in this Cause at the
request of Mr George Baldero of London merchant the producents
brother. and saith he is the nephew of the producent and
further or otherwise then negatively cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith he hath knowne the sayd Henry Baldero from
his this Rendents Childhood, and saith he the sayd Henry Boldero
now lives in Roterdam and there hath lived about thirty yeares
videlicet att Rotterdam in Holland.

To the third fourth and fifth Interrogatoryes he saith he knoweth
nothing of the contents thereof./

Repeated in Court before the three Judges

John Moody [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The fifteenth day of December .1653.

A Busines of Examination of witnesses on
the part and behalfe of John Harrison)
master and sole owner of the shipp the)
Ostrich of London and of her tackle apparrell)
and furniture, and of all her lading)
except what is hereafter mentioned to belong)
to the Mariners of the sayd shipp, seized with all the)
lading by the King of Denmarke or his)
ministers att Copenhagen within the sayd Kingdome)
Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd John Harrison

Rp.

1

John ffurnace of Wapping in the county of
Middlesex Mariner late one of the sayd shipps
Company aged 24 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.305r Annotate
[?XXXX XXXX]

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate John Harrison  in the monethes
of June July August September 1652. and for and during all the
tyme continually since to this present was and is the lawfull owner of
the sayd shipp the ostrich and her tackle and furniture and of a great
part of her lading, and was allso within the said tyme Master and
Commander of her and so ought to be. the premisses he knoweth
being one of the sayd shipps Company, and knoweing that the producent
bought the sayd shipp at dantzyck in or about the moneth of May
1652. and laded a great parte of her lading att Riga for his
owne Accompt in the moneth of June 1652. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

And saith the Mariners
of the sayd shipp did lade aboard the sayd shipp for their owne accompt 204. bundles of fflax
of the value of about 9. s per bundle making in the whole 91 li 16 s
sterling, wll which goods wares and merchandizes were laden att Riga to be transported
to London for the accompt aforesayd. And saith there were eight
Mariners of the sayd shipps Company (besides the sayd Master and his maye who lost in Clothes and
losse of tyme by reason of the seizure of the sayd shipp hereafter
sett forth the summe of 200 li sterling as he beleiveth And this
deponent for his owne part saith that he hath lost thereby in Cloathes
and losse of tyme the value of 30 li sterling and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
the Ostrich was in August aforesayd an able new stanch and well built
shipp and was of the burthen of 240. tonnes and was with her
tackle apparell and furniture of the cleare value of 1100 li in the
Judgement of this deponent and somuch the sayd Harrison did in
May next proceeding pay for her att Dantzick as yhis deponent hath
heard and beleiveth and otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith tha in the sayd
moneth of September 1652 the sayd shipp the Ostrich and
her foresaid lading in her was att Copenhagen in denmarke and was
then and there deteyned and stopped from
comeing away from thence by the Ministers of the King of denmarke.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.305v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 15th day of December 1653.

A Busines of Examination of Witnesses)
on the part and behalfe of Robert Elison)
Thomas Bonner and others Owners and)
Laders of the shipp the ffreindshipp)
of Newcastle and of Edward Nixon the)
Master of her seized with all her lading)
by the King of denmarke or his Ministers
att Copenhagen within that Kingdome)
Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Robert Elison
and others

John ffurnes of Wapping
in the County of Middlesex mariner aged
24 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second and third article sof the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that he knoweth well the arlate shipp the ffreindship of Newcastle
whereof the arlate Edward Nixon was Master the voyage in
quesion, And saith he saw the sayd shipp att Riga arlate in the
monethes of June and July 1652, and then and there sawe the sayd shipp
fully laden with flax Clapboards wainscot pipestaves
and deale boards and such like Commoditie. And saith the
sayd shipp and her lading of the like sight of this deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.306r Annotate
did in August then next following arrive and remayne att Copenhagen
in Denmarke under the Conduct of the foresayd Edward Nixon this
deponent being one of the Company of the shipp Ostrich that was att
Riga and Copenhagen the tymes aforesayd respectively whereby this
deponent came to take notice of the premisses, But who were or are
Owners of the sayd shipp or goods, or the particulars of the sayd goods or
their value or for whose accompt they were laden he saith he
knoweth not, And otherwise cannot depose, saving that the ffreindshipp
aforesayd was with her sayd lading bound for England and
for the Accompt of Englishmen as he hath credibly heard and
verily beleiveth.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp ffreindshipp in the sayd monethes was a strong stanch new and
well built shipp of the burthen of about 300 tonnes with 13 gunnes
and furniture requisit, and was with her sayd gunnes and furniture
of the value of 2000 li sterling as he beleiveth. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
the ffreindshipp was of this deponents sight in September 1652. att
Copenhagen aforesayd, and was then and there deteyned and stopt from
proceeding upon her voyage by the order and by the Ministers of the
King of Denmarke, and in ffebruary 1652. was with her sayd
lading and the shipps Companyes Cloathes and necessaries in her
in a warlike and hostile manner seized upon in the sight of this
deponent, by the Ministers of the foresayd King and by his authority
and the sayd Nixon and shipps Company were then and there disossed
and turned out of her, whereby the sayd shipp and her lading
became utterly lost to the English Owners thereof. And further
cannot depose.

To the 6th article he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and further cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposition are true./

John [?fXXXX]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Doctor Godolphin)
----
The 15th day of December 1653

On the behalfe of the Keepers of the Liberty)
of England by Authority of Parliament)
against the shipp the Posthorse of)
Amsterdam whereof Melle Mellys was)
Master. Bud)

Examined upon Interrogatories on behalfe of
the Keepers of the Liberty of England
by Authority of Parliament.

Rowe dt.

1)

Melle Mellys of Amsterdam Mariner Master of the
sayd shipp the Posthorse aged 31 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth.

To the first Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp the Posthorse doth belonge to the
Port of Amsterdam and so hath done for theis [?XX] monethes now past, and
saith the Owners of the sayd shipp were and are all Inhabitants of Amsterdam
one of them onely excepted who is an Inhabitant of ffreizland, and
this deponent and all his shipps Company were and are all subiects of
the States of the United Provinces some in Holland some in ffreizland
and this deponent who is Master of the sayd shipp in Amsterdam. And otherwise
cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.306v Annotate
To the second Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp began her outward voyage
from Amsterdam, and was att the tyme of her seizure bound to the sayd port of
Amsterdam with her lading which was consigned to and was to have
bene delivered to the foresaid Owners, and others merchants and Inhabitants 
of Amsterdam. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatory he saith the said shipp receyved aboard the goods [?soe]
seized in her att Bordeaux about three weekes now past, and the said
lading be fatts and 2 tonnes of wyne  and about [?XX bushells] of Chestnutts and beleiveth the same was growne
worse with lyeing aboard the shipp the Chestnutts especially being
a finit subiect to rott. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the ffourth Interrogatory he saith there was aboard the sayd shipp at the
tyme of her seizure a sea breife, one bill of lading and two
small packetts of letters all which were taken out of the chest of this deponent when
Captaines Company that made the seizure. And otherwise negatively for
his part And further cannot depose.

'WW' [MARKE, RH SIDE]
Molle Moll his marke
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

Seaward Martins of [?Molgueren] in ffriesland
Mariner Steersman of the sayd shipp the Posthorse
aged thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th. Interrogatories This deponent saith, that the sayd
shipp the Posthorse for these .11. weekes of this deponents knowledge [?hath]
belonged to the Port of Amsterdam where her owners live one
excepted who is an Inhabitant of Dock[?ham] in ffreizland, and
saith the foresayd Melle Mellys of Amsterdam was Master of the
sayd shipp this voyage, and he with this deponent and all the sayd
shipps Company are subiects of the States of the United Provinces
And further that the sayd shipp began her outward voyage from
Amsterdam and at Bordeaux tooke in her present lading being .60. fatts and
two [?tonnes] of wine, and one hundred and sixty bushells of
Chestnutts which wines will grow worse, and Chestnutts rott if they
abide long aboard the sayd shipp, and saith the sayd shipp was
att the tyme of her seizure bound for Amsterdam with her lading
and thither should and would have returned in case she had not
bene interupted, and the sayd goods were there to be delivered to the
severall persons there livinge And saith there were some papers
aboard the sayd shipp when she was seized the Contents whereof
he knoweth not all which came into the hands and possession 
of the seizors and further otherwise than negatively cannot
depose saving that the sayd shipp was built in Norway.

[?XXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest
before Doctor Clarke and Doctor Godolphin/
----
The 12th day of December 1653

On the behalfe of the sayd John Harrison)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2)

L'Estrange Mordant in the parish of Saint [?XXX]
London merchant aged 24 yeares or therabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.307r Annotate
To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or about the monethes
of June and July 1652 he this deponent being Resident att Riga in
Lyfeland did then and there see the arlate shipp the Ostrich whereof the
sayd John Harrison was master att the sayd Port, And saith he well knoweth
that the sayd John Harrison did then and there lade aboard the sayd shipp for
his owne Accompt severall good quantities of hemp flax wainscott and Clapboard
as well by an extract of the sayd shipps Cargazon taken out of the Custome
house of Riga which this deponent hath in his possession as for that he
this deponent himselfe did sell part of the sayd lading to him, and saw
many of the respective parcells laden, and more particularly saith that the
sayd Harrison did putt aboard the sayd shipp for his owne Accompt 68. bundles of
fine hemp conteyning 206. ship pounds beiing in English weight 670 [?XX]
as the same were entred in the sayd Custome hpwse, which cost the first
penny in Lyfland about 12 dollars per pound and in case it had come safe
to this Port of London would have yeilded thirty or forty shillings the
English hundred weight and allso severall matts of fine Letnas flaxe which
by the entry in the foresayd Custome howse did amount to .53. lb ship pound
and is in Englsh weight one hindred seventy two 1/4 C. weight
the value whereof (he knoweth not. And likewise a quantity of Losetow
the cetainly or value whereof he knoweth not.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 16th day of December 1653.

The Keepers against the Supply Henry Oake)

The foresayd Henry Oake a witnes formerly
examined upon the allegation of Richard Ba[?t]son
and Company, to the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first Interrogatory he saith he was master of the sayd shipp Supply in September
and October last past and att the tyme the sayd shipp was arrested by a warrant
out of this Court. And otherwise negatively.

To the second Interrogatory he saith that the saud shipp Supply att the tyme of the
bilging of the Abraham and upon the 20. 21. and 22th dayes of September
was of this deponents knowledge in the River of Thames, 

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.307v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 17th day of december 1653/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of domingo Centurione et cetera)
for 138 baggs of woolls in the Morning starr)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4.

Egidio Mottet Secretary to his Excellency the Lord Ambassador
of his Catholique Majesty the King of Spaine aged 32 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.308r Annotate
To the first and the rest of the Articles of the sayd allegation. This deponent
saith that he hath seene and perused a letter from his Cathoique Majesty the
King of Spaine bearing date the .21th. day of May last past signed
by his Majesties owne hand and directed to his Ambassador here Resident on
England wherein after recitalll made that the sayd Don Domingo Centurion
(who is of the Counsell of his sayd Majesty) had laden aboard the sayd shipp the
Morning Starr or Stella Dorada att Cadiz to be transported to Dunkerke
and there delivered for Accompt of his Majesties factors. 7 baggs of wooll of Andalusia and 51 baggs of Segovia woolls

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marked as in the margent and for the supply of his Majestyes owne affaires and army in fflanders
according to a Contract made by the sayd Domingo Centurion in that behalfe
his Majety did and doth require the sayd Lord Ambassador to seeke for restitution of
the sayd woolls in the behalfe of the sayd Domingo Centurion of and from
this Commonwealth and Parliament and Courts of Iustice thereof into whose
power the sayd woolls were come by vertue of a seizure made of the
sayd shipp by some of the frigats of this Commonwealth. And this deponent
hath likewise seene and perused another letter dated [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] from Madrid
from his Excellency Don Lewis de Haro Duke  de Olivares his sayd Majesties first
and Vheife Minister of State directed to the sayd Lord Ambassador of Spaine
here Resident to the same effect and purpose which the Kings aforesayd letter
ffor which Reasons and by reason of the bill of lading to the allegation annexed
and now shewne him This deponent beleiveth that the sayd
Don Domingo Centurion in the moneth of January 1653 new
stile last past was and now is the lawfull owner of the arlate 138 baggs
of wooll, and that he did lade them by his factor att Cadiz for accompt
of the foresayd factories managed by him in his sayd Majestyes Royall name
to be transported to Dunkerke and that the sayd woolls were there to be
delivered for supply of his sayd Majesties Arms and Affaires in fflanders
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. negatively.

To the 2. 3. and 4th Interrogatories he saith that by letters of advise and publike
fame and as Secretary to the Lord Ambassador of Spaine he knoweth the sayd
Don Domingo Centurion to be a Spaniard and of his Majestyes Counsell of Spaine
and an Inhabitant of Madrid and there to have lived many yeares
and the sayd John de Vindt to be his factor resident att  Cadiz and further
cannot depose.

To the .5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 14th. he saith he cannot depose otherwise
than as aforesayd being constantly resident in London.

To the .15th he saith he was borne att Leige in the Confines of Germany and
liveth in this City and otherwise negatively.

To the 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. and 22th. he saith he cannot depose otherwise
than as aforesayd.

Egidio Mottet [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clerke and Godolphin.
----
The 17th day of December 1653. Examined upon the sayd allegation

The Clayme of the widdow and)
heyres of George do Etton hear)
for his sylver in the Morning star)

Michael Van Lubken of Hamburgh Mariner Commander
of the sayd shipp the Morning Starr aged 30 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth 
and saith as followeth. videlicet

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.308v Annotate
To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth
of January 1653 last past new stile the widdow and heyres of George
Ettonheard were accounted the lawfull Owners of the arlate eight chests
or Cases of silver conteyning in each of them twenty thousand Rialls
in peices of eight marked as in the margent and beleiveth they
were and now are the Owners thereof, for that att the tyme of lading
the same hereafter sett forth the party who brought the same aboard had
dispatches or Licenses for lading the same in the name of the sayd Claymer
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the moneth
of January 1653 new stile the foresayd eight Chests or Cases of
sylver marked and conteyning as aforesayd were laden aboard the sayd
shipp the Morning Starr att Cadiz for the accompt and risko of the sayd widdow and heyres
of George de Etton Head to be transported to Dunkirke and there to be
delivered for their accompt to their factors which Chests of sylver
This deponent being master of the sayd shipp receaved aboard for the accompt
aforesayd And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That upon the lading
of the sayd Chests of sylver he this deponent did signe severall  bills
oflading for the same a shoare att Cadiz to say 3 bills all  of one tenor for three of the sayd
Chests and 3 more all of one tenor for two more of the sayyd Chests and
that the three bills of lading of different tenors left in the Registry of
this Court to be shewne to him this Examinat were and are three of the
sayd originall bills of lading and the same are and were signed by this
deponent with his owne name and hand as is now to be seene at the foote
of every of them respectively and the same and reall and were so signed
att Cadiz on or about the dayes of the dates threof respectively And
further referring himselfe to the sayd bills of lading he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the Barkers who brought
the sayd sylver aboard by shewing the foresayd dispatches for the same, and by
factors by whose order the same were laden did upon the lading thereof
declare to this deponent that the sayd cases of sylver wer for the Accompt
aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after the lading and
putting on board of the sayd shipp the Morning Starr the sayd eight Cases
of sylver the sayd shipp did depart therwith towards Dunkerke and in her
Course thither was mett withall surprized and taken by some of the Parliaments
shipps and by them brought into the River of Thames, And saith that att
the tyme of the sayd surprizall of the sayd shipp all the sayd eight Cases
of sylver were and remained on board the sayd shipp and came into the
possession of the Captaine who made the seizure. All which he knoweth
being master of the sayd shipp and aboard her att the tyme of the sayd
seizure And otherwise cannot depose./

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by common
report the foresayd widdow and heyres of George da Etton Heard are
Spaniards, subiects of the King of Spaine, Inhabitants of Madrid
and such as having the management of the Office of Crusado do
furnish the King of Spaine from tyme to tyme with great quantities of
sylver and moneyes for the service of his Armies and affaires in
fflanders, for which service the sylver now in question was [?deXXXX]
as the foresaid factors upon lading the same did declare and otherwise
cannot depose

To the seventh he saith the sayd shipp was bound to Dunkerke and had [?XX]
gone thither if she had not bene seized as aforesayd, and there [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.309r Annotate
have discharged the foresayd Cases of sylver for the accompt and use
aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first he saith he was master of the said shipp and aboard her when she was
seized, and tooke first Charge of her att Hamburgh where he first came
aboard her and hath bene Master of her for these six yeares now past

To the second he saith he hath knowne the sayd Claymers by some severall yeares
and otherwise saving his foregoing depositions cannot depose

To the third he saith the sayd sylver was received aboard by this Rendent in the day
tyme being then laden by Thomas Manuel de Herrera of Sevill who laded 6
cases, and a part John Salldias of Cadiz who laded 2 Cases both of them being Spaniards

To the 4th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd

To the 5th and 6th he saith that he caused an entry of .6. of the sayd cases of sylver to be
entred in his booke as marked with the armes of the King of Spaine, and farther referring
himselfe to the sayd bills of lading, and sayd booke which is in the Registry of
this Court he cannot depose. and saving that he entred 2 other of the sayd Chests
in the sayd booke with the marke aforesayd and name of the consignatary agreeable to the bill of lading [#]

[# LH MARGIN]
[?XXX] that he is sure
[?XX[ sayd Chests or cases
[?XX] by the sayd John
[?XX] and the other
[?XX] Cashier of the
[?sayd] [?Thomas Manuel] de Herrera
[?XXX] of his Master
Michael V. Lubkin [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

To the .7/ negatively for his part

To the 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12th negatively.

To the 13th he saith he was borne att Hamburgh and there hath his habitation
and otherwise negatively.

To the 14th hee saith the sayd shipp began her outwards voyage from Hamborough
with her lading of peice goods wax, cloth and other things in all 300 tones
all taken in att Hamburgh and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 15th. negatively.

To the 16th. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 17th. he saith he cannot depose

To the .18. he saith he was not present att nor saw the buying of the sayd sylver. and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .19th. he saith the sayd sylver was all laden under Command of the forts of
Cadiz and there was twos license or dispatches for the same one from the port of
Sevill the other from Cadiz which were left with this Rendent and were aboard the sayd shipp att
the tyme of her seizure and and came into the power of the seizers. and further
cannot depose.

To the 20 and 21th. he sayeth he knoweth well that It is a common and
usuall thing to transport sylver and moneyes out of Spaine to
other parts, and otherwise not knowinge the lawes of Spaine he saith
he cannot depose.

[?Xell] Van Lubkan [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 17th day of december .1653. Examined upon the
sayd allegation

The Claime of John Stephen Spinola)
for his sylver in the Morning star)

3

Michael Van Lubkin of Hamburgh Mariner Captaine and Commander
of the sayd shipp the Morning Starr aged 30 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That the sayd John Stephen
Spinola by common repute is a Spaniard and a subiect of the King of Spaine
using to trade betwixt Spaine and fflanders for sylver and other goods
having his Correspondents in the sayd respective places for the manageing of the
sayd trade. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3. 4. 5. and 6th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that in the month of January
1653. new stile there were laden aboard the sayd shipp the Morning Starr att Cadiz 2 barrs of
sylver wrapped in linnen marked as in the margent for the Accompt of the
sayd John Stephen Spinola to be transported to Dunkerke and there to be delivered
to his Assignes for his use. which sylver this deponent receyved aboard the
sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.309v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

he is of Hamburgh both by birth and habitation and otherwise
negatively
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.310r Annotate
G.G.G.

To the 14th hee saith hee did not see the interrate ffairefaxe his order and
further saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot depose

To the 15th hee saith that divers shipps on the downes which were imbargoed
by the Imbargoe abovesayd Interrogate departed from the Downes before the Endeavour
went from thence, and came up into the River of Thames and others came
thence since the departure of the Recovery and are in the River of Thames
but hee knoweth not nor hath heard or beleeeveth that any of the Shipps
then in the downes stayed there or at Quinborowe or ffeversham Interrate
or any places thereabouts And beleeveth that the sayd Jopp could without
endangering his sayd shipp and her ladeing have remayned in the downes
Quinborowe or ffeversham And further hee cannot depose

To the 16th hee saith it concerneth him not to answere thereto for that hee hath
not deposed to the contents of the article Interrogate/

To the 17th Interrogatory hee saith that hee did see the shipps named in his
foregoeing deposition and divers others whose names hee knoweth not rideing
on the downes at the same tyme when the Endeavour rode there some of
which were there before the Endeavour came thither and at her first comming
thither some of the company of the sayd shipps that were there
before the Endeavour spake and declared in the presence and hearing
of this deponent and others of the Company of the Endeavour that there
was an Imbargoe or oder come into the downes to stay all
Shipps, and others of the sayd shipps came into the downes after
the Endeavour, And to the rest of the Interrogatory hee cannot depose
not seeing or knowing or hearing of any money paid by their ffreighters
nor knowing their ffreighters nor having heard that any of them went since
to Spaine, the Straights or any other place beyond Seas and further saving his
foregoeing depositions hee cannot depose./

To the 18th hee saith hee hath heard that a warrant was procured to [?save]
the mariners of the Shipp the Endeavour from pressing but when the same
was procured or by whome hee knoweth ot nor hath heard but heard
the foresayd William Jopp saye hee had a warrant to that purpose And further
saving his foregooeing depositions hee cannot depose

To the 19th hee saith that hee knoweth not nor remembreth how longe the shipp
Interrate was at deptford before any corne was taken out of her hee not being present
at the takeing thereof and further hee cannot depose./

To the 20th hee cannot depose having heard nothing of the contents thereof./

To the 21th hee cannot depose./

To the last Interrogatory hee saith as before hee hath predeposed that the sayd Jope soe
farr as this deponent observed did doe his utmost endeavour to have performed the
voyage in question, and therefore this deponent knoweth not nor beleeveth that the Interrate
ffairefax was any waie damnified by any neglect of the sayd Jope and
to the rest of the contents of the sayd Interrogatory hee saith hee knoweth not nor hath heard
any thing of the contents thereof./

William harris [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke and
doctor Godolphin./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.310v Annotate
The sayd John Thurmewood upon the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatory hee saith hee hath well knowne the producent [?XXXX]
for these sixe yeares last past and more and the Interrogent for these two moneths
past or thereabouts by sight only And saith hee cometh to be a witnes at the [?request]
of the producent and ws one of the sayd shipps company and Masters mate thereof [?XXX]
the first of July past and hath received two moneths pay of the producent, and
hath two moneths pay and sixe dayes to receive And to the rest of the Interrogatory
hee answereth negatively

To the second Interrogatory hee saith hee came first on board the shipp Interrate at [?XXXX]
And saith that hee hath heard the sayd Jope the Master thereof saye that hee
was freighted by the arlate Mr  ffairfax for a voyage to Malaga and that
the sayd shipp was to begin her voyage on the 20th of July last and further
to this Interrogatorie saving his foregoeing deposition to which hee referreth
hee cannot depose./

[ADD ATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.311r Annotate
sayd fflemings and did not see the payment of any other money but beleeveth as
is predeposed that it cost the sayd Jope at the least tenn pounds for the expences
predeposed of And further saving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth hee
cannot depose./

To the 8th

To the 9th

To the Tenth

To the 11th

To the 12th

To the 13th Interrogatory hee saith that hee did not see nor reade nor knoweth the date
of the Order Interrogate nor sawe the Interrate Jope served therewith hee this deponent
being on shipp board and the sayd order served on the sayd Jope as hee hath heard
and beleeveth ashore) And saith that hee beleeveth that there was such an order
for that all the sipps then on the downes gave obsedience thereunto as well as the
Endeavour aforesayd And also well knoweth that the said Jopp could
nopt have bin gone before his being served with the sayd Imbargoe for that
the same was arrived and publiquely knowne to other shipps then in the downes
before the Endeavour came thether and saith the Master of the
Shipp the George who was in the downes before  the Endeavour came thither did
in the presence of this deponent and others of the Endeavours Company before the Endeavour
came to an Anchor in the downes declare and say that there was an Imbargoe
come thither to saye all vessells bound to the southward and especially for
Malega in Spaine and saith that as the sayd Jope told him this deponent the sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.312r Annotate
To the last Interrogatorie hee saith that hee never heard any conference
to the effecte Interrogate betweene the sayd ffairefax and Jope nor beleeveth or
is perswaded in his conscience that the sayd ffairefax is in any way damnified by
the meanes of the sayd Jope for that hee this deponent
being on shipp board from he first to the last well observed that the syad Jope did
his true endeavour to have proceeded on the voyage in question if hee had not
bin hindered in manner predeposed And further hee cannot depose

Johan [?x] hurmwood [SIGNATURE OR MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the thee Judges the 7th
of 9ber 1653./
----
The 7th day of November 1653./

The clayme of the sayd Colonell Prideger for)
beefe and porke in the Sea fflower.)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the Claymer/

2

Thomas Harris of the Isle of Wight  Mariner Master and halfe owner
of the shipp the Sea fflower aged 58 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet/

To the first second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that the arlate John Snowe did provide and lade on board the Sea fflower arlate
nynety eight hogsheads of beefe and porke and 50 barrells of porke and
beleeveth that the sayd casks could not nor did conteyne lesse then eleven thousand
eight hundred and twenty, fower pound peeces of beefe and eleven thousand eight
hundred and three two pound peeces of porke, but saith by reason the
bills of ladeing and all other his this deponents papers on board were taken from him
by a dutch man of warr, hee cannot more certainely depose as to the number of
the sayd peeces, And saith that the same were soe laden by the sayd [?XXXe]
at Bristoll about the first day of May 1653 arlate to be transported from
thence to Portsmouth there to be imployed for the victualing the Navie of this
Commonwealth but saith that in the sayd shipps course thitherwards the sayd shipp
with the sayd provisions on board her was seized and taken by a ducth man of
warr and by him carried into Saint Malloes in ffrancethe
premisses hee knoweth being master of the sayd shipp the Sea fflowerand on
board her when shee was seized by the sayd dutchman of warr and carried by
him to Saint Malloes in her and there turned out of the sayd shipp on shoare  hee and all his company And saith
that hee hath heard and beleeveth that the sayd shipp the sea fflower being manned with ffrenchmen went out againe
from Saint Malloes with all or at least some part
of the sayd beefe and porke on board her, (intending as this deponent hath heard to goe thence
to Saint Christophers) and was taken as this deponent hath heard and a great quantitie
of the sayd beefe and porke aboard her by the Saphir ffrigott arlate and brought
into Plimouth where shee still remayneth and this deponent having gotten passage
from ffrance into England found the sayd shipp the Sea fflower at
Plymouth and beleeveth and hath heard that a great quantitie of the sayd beefe and porke on board her there at
hee this deponents comeing thither [?XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] And further to these articles hee cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.312v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

the marke of the sayd
Thomas 'H' Harris [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

Rp.

3

John Wilkins of East Cowes in the Isle of Wight Merchant
parte Owner of the sayd shipp the Sea fflower aged 40
Yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.313v Annotate
The 8th of November 1653

Jope against ffairefax)
Budd Smith)

Examined upon the allegation on behalfe of the sayd Jope

3

Morgan Evans of Saint Olave Southwarke Shipp Carpenter
Aged 42 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

[ADD DATA]

The arlate William Jope had on the 26th day of July last about seaventeene able English seamen ready
to sayle with him on the voyage mentioned in the Charterparty arlate whereof
this deponent was one and in persuance of such his sayd voyage did with his
sayd men that day breake ground from Rederiff or thereabouts but the winde being [?XX]
was enforced to meare neere thereabouts againe and shortly afte divers
of the sayd shipps company were pressed as this deponent beleeves, but hee did
not see any of them pressed  except the Gunner and Boatswaine thereof who were pressed before the shipp [?XXXXXXXXXX] by reason hee this deponentw as gone on shoare to escape pressing
if hee could, and this deponent afterwards returning on board found that divers
were pressed away and the sayd Jope being in want of men and English men being hard to be gotten
hee signed certaine dutch men to assiste him to sayle the sayd shipp downe to Quin=
borowe where hee was to take in the remaynder of his outward lading and a wherry to bringe them back from thence and did with
the helpe of the sayd dutch men and him selfe and his Mate and Pilott with
much difficulty by gods blessing arrive safely with the said shipp at Quinboorowe on
Satturday the thirtith day of July last and this deponent and the [?rest] of the sayd shipps company to avoide pressing came downe in the said wherry and came that night on board at Quinborowe And further hee cannot depose saving hee
saith hee beleeveth and is perswaded in his conscience that it cost the sayd Jope in
extraordinary expenses in hyering the sayd fflemings and for the wherry to carry
back the sayd fflemings from Quinborowe and other charges which hee would
not to have bin at if hee could have kept his owne Company in board
above tenn pounds sterling./

To the 6th and 7th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith that the sayd shipp arriving
late at Quinborowe on the Satterday there was then only one hoy and noe more with
wheate from Mr ffairfax arlate to be laded on board the said shipp the Endeavour
which hoye had not above a third parte of the Corne which was afterwards
laded for the sayd ffairfax Accompt on board the sayd shipp whereupon the arlate
Jope went the next workeing day videlicet on the Monday Morning next from Quinsborow to ffeversham to hasten the comeing of the resideue of the sayd Corne
and returne on shipp board the same Monday at night, and seeing that notwithsatnding
his endeavours noe more corne was sent hee the sayd Jope on the Wednesday morning
sent the arlate Pendarvis to hasten away the remaynder of the corne which was
to be laden and thereupon an other hoye came and brought an other parcell of
wheate but not all which was to have bin sent, soe that the first hoy was faine to
goe back to ffeversham and fetch the remaynder of the sayd Corne which the
second hoy had not brought, and returned not therewith untill Satterday the [?XX]
of August last And further to these articles he cannot depose.

To the 8th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.315r Annotate
[add data]

To the 4th hee saith that hee sawe about 17 mariners aboard the Endeavour
the day Interartae and aving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth hee
cannot depose./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.316v Annotate
The 8th of November 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of John Snowe English Merchant)
for 124 bushells of white pease and 13)
way of Coales conteyning eighteene)
chadron and 24 bushells put on board the)
shipp the Sea fflower whereof one Thomas)
Harris was master Clements Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the Claymer

Rp. EA

1us

Thomas Harris of the Isle of Wight Mariner
Master of the Shipp the Sea fflower aged 59
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet

To the first second third and 4th articlesof the sayd allegation hee saith and
deposeth that at the tyme arlate hee this deponent was and soe still is [?master]
and halfe Owner of the Sea fflower arlate and the arlate John Wilkins the other
halfe Owner thereof And saith the sayd shipp in the Moneth of May [?last]
was lying in the Riber at Bristoll arlate and had then receaved a great part of
her ladeing which consisted of beefe and porke for the victualling of the [?Navy]
of this Commonwealth and was to be transported from thense to Portsmouth
and that after receipt of the same and in the moneth of May aforesayd the
arlate John Snowe did lade on board the sayd Shipp to be transported
from Bristoll to Portsmouth aforesayd and there t be delivered to the arlate
Nicholas Broadway a hundred seaventy and fower bushells of white
pease and fowerteene waye of Seacoles, and this deponent did signe
three bills of ladeing of one tenor for the sayd pease and coales accordingly

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.317r Annotate
To the 5th hee saith hee well knoweth that the Seafflower arlate
at the tyme of her seizure by the sayd dutch man of warr had noe
other pease or seacoles aboard her but those predeposed of and soe consequently
beleeveth shee had noe other when the Saphir tooke her, but
knoweth not for certayne whether shee then had those on board her for that hee was then
on shoare in ffrance And further hee cannot depose./

To the sixth hee saith the arlate John Snowe is Comonly reputed an
English man and an Agent or depouty to the victualers of the Navie of
this Common wealth and knoweth hee did as a deputie or agent to the
sayd victualers lade the beefe and pease aforesayd on board the Sea
fflower aforesayd and further hee cannot depose

To the last hee saith his foregoeing depositions are true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first hee saith hee went Master of the Sea fflower from
Bristoll and was in her at the tyme of her seizure by the dutch man
of warr but remembreth not the moneth or day thereof when the sayd
seizure was made, nor knoweth what moneth or day shee was retaken
by the Saphir being then in ffrance but saith that in October last hee
this deponent found the sayd Shipp the Sea fflower at Plymouth And further
hee cannot depose./

To the second Interrogatorue ee saith that the sayd pease and coales as is predeposed
were laded by John Snowe as his owne goods and hee beleeveth the sayd
Snowe was [?and is] to beare the losse of them if they be not in the shipp the Sea fflower and retaken in her And
further hee cannot depose./

To the third hee saith that hee died see the pease and coles predeposed of at
the tyme of their ladeing and knoweth they were aboard when the dutch
man of warr seized the sayd shipp as is predeposed but hath not seene
them since and further hee cannot depose./

The marke of the sayd
Tho: 'H' harris [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctor Clarke doctor
Godolphin and Charles George Cocke the
[?XXX[ aforesayd/
----
The same day/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

Rp EA

2us

John Wilkins of East Cowes in the Isle of Wight
halfe owner of the sayd shipp the Sea fflower
aged 40 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first second third and 4th articles of the sayd allegation hee
saith and deposeth That hee this deponent well knoweth that in the monethe
of May last the Shipp the Sea fflower arlate was rideing in the
River of Bristoll arlate at which tyme this deponent was and still is halfe Owner
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.318r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The tenth day of November 1653./

Daniell ffairefax against William Jope)
Smith Budd)

David Dolley of the parish of Saint Olace
in Southwarke Merchant aged 37 yeares or there
abouts a witnesse sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.318v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 11th day of November 1653./

Jope against ffairefax aforesayd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the
sayd Jope

4

Thomas Stone of Rederiff in the County of
Surrey Mariner Master of the shipp the [?XX]
of London aged 30 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.320r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories/

To the first hee saith that he hath knowne the producent Jope for these
ten or 12 yeares last past and hath knowne the Interrogant Mr ffairfax for these two
months last past or thereabouts and that by sight only and saith that hee cometh to be
a witnes in this Cause at the request of the producent and is none of the
Company of the Endeavour nor ever was And further to this Interrogatory hee cannot
depose./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.321r Annotate
To the 21th Interrogatory hee saith hee cannot depose therto knowing nothing
what price was agreed betweene the sayd ffairefax and frye only
hee hath heard the same was fower pounds fifteene shillings a tonne
which in these troublesome tymes is but an ordinary freight and beleeveth
the sayd ffairfax would not have hiered any to fgoe that voyage at the
rate of tenn or fifteene shillings a tonne cheaper then the rate
above specified and further hee cannot depose./

To the 22th hee beleeveth the sayd ffairefax and all others merchants
and ffreighters who had shipps to goe for Mallega at the tyme predeposed of are damnified
by reason the shipps were imbargoed as is predeposed and soe were all the Masters
and Mariners of the sayd shipps and further hee cannot depose./

Thomas Stormes [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges the day
aforesayd/
----
The 17th of November 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation/

5

Abraham ffilter of Redderiff in the County of Surrey 
Mariner Master of the Shipp Peter and John of London
aged 32 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined saith
and deposeth as followed videlicet./

To the first article of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee this 
deponent being Master of the Shipp the Peter and John well knoweth that
longe before the 20th day day of July 1653 arlate hee this deponent 
hath diverse men pressed from on board his shipp the Peter and John aforesayd
for the service of this Commonwealth and diverse after the sayd Twentith day of
July and knoweth afore that before and after the sayd day there was a generall
presse of able seamen for the service of this Commonwealth and hee this
deponent did see diverse men pressed for the sayd service in the River of Thames 
from on board other Merchant Mens shipps then in the River which
hee believeth the officers who pressed the sayd men durst not to have done
unlesse they had bin lawfully authorized soo to doe And that there was
a publique repute amongst Mariners and Merchants then that there was 
an authority and power granted soo to doe and further he cannot depose.

To the 10th 11th and 12th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth that
hee this deponent lying upon the downes with his ship the Peter and
John aforesayd on the 11th day of August last well knoweth that the sayd 
Jope came with his shipp the Endeavour into the downes the sayd 11th day of 
August And afore well knoweth that before the sayd 11th day of August there
was an Order come into the downes for the stopping of all the shipps bound 
for Mallega whereof this deponents shipp was [out] from proceeding either
voyages And this deponent was served with the sayd Order on the sayd 11th day.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.321v Annotate
of August or shortly after but the certaine tyme hee doth not remember
And further hee cannot depose saving hee saith that hee this deponent about
the beginning of October last presented a petition to the Councell of State that
hee might be licensed to proceede with his sayd shipp the Peter and John on
his voyage to Mallega but his sayd petition was reiected
[?XX] and turned over for an answere thereof to the Committee of the
Admiralty and Mr Blackbourne a Clarke of the said Committee told
this deponent that for ought hee knew the sayd Imbargoe was still in
force and therefore told this deponent hee might not have liberty to depart
with his sayd Shipp And further to these articles hee cannot
depose/

To the 14th 15th and 16th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith hee
cannot depose./

To the 18th hee saith that it is not usuall for shipp stayed in the downes
from proceeding on their voyages to remayne at Quinborowe or
any other place below Gravesend as being there were safe then in the
Downes, for that there is noe fort or defence now maynteyned with which
to secure them in these perilous tymes And further hee cannot depose/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.322r Annotate
did agree with Captaine daniell the Master thereof to give him 10 s a tonne
more then their former agreement with him was towards reparations
of his losses and charges expended by reason of the Imbargo aforesayd
And also saith that after the seaventeenth day of September hee this deponent
did see the arlate Jope in persuance of his voyage now in question falne
downe belowe Gravesend lower then any shipps bound for Mallega were
then fallen downe, and this deponent alsoe lay with his shipp the Peter
and John at Gravesend with intente alsoe to goe to Mallega and thereby
knoweth that the winde was contrary untill the day of the last Imbargoe
comeing forth soe that this deponent nor any other Mallega shipp could
proceede on their voyages And further to these articles hee cannot
depose saving hee saith that about the 18th or nynteenth of October
last the last Imbargoe came from the Councell of State to staye all shipps
from proceeding on their voyages and was not released untill about the
16th or 17th day of this instant November as hee hath credibly heard
and beleeveth and soe much is publique and notorious amongst Mariners
and Merchants./

[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first Interrogatory hee saith hee knoweth the producent and hath soe done
for these 8 yeares last past and the Interrogant ffairefax hee knoweth not
and saith that hee was required by the producent to testifie the truth of
his knowledge in this cause and to the rest of the Interrogatory hee
answereth negatively./

To the second hee saith that hee is now of the Company of the shipp the
Endeavour and therfore knoweth nothing of the contents of this Interrogatory.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.323r Annotate
the River of Thames and hath not bin the downes since And further
saving his foregoeing depositions to which he refereth hee cannot
depose/

To the 17th hee saith that hee did see on the downes all the shipps
by him predeposed of in his deposition to the 20th article Interrate and further
to this Interrogatorie saving his foregoeing depositions whereto hee
referreth hee cannot depose./

To the 18th hee saith that saving his foregoeing depositions whereto
hee referreth hee cannot depose./

To the 19th hee cannot depose./

To the 20th hee saith that saving his foregoeing depositions to which
hee referreth hee cannot depose.

To the 21th Interrogatorie hee saith hee knoweth nothing nor hath heard any
thing of the contents of this Interrogatorie

To the 22th hee saith hee beleeveth that the Interrogate ffarefax (as other
ffreighters of shipps were and are) is damnified by reason of the imbargos
predeposed of and soe were both masters of shipps and Seamen to their great losse and preiudice and further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose./

Repeated before the three Judges/

Abraham: ffilleter [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 18th day of November 1653

Daniell ffairefax against Jope)
Smith Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd ffairefax

2

Edward Watson of ffeversham in the County
of Kent Mariner aged 50 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth
as followeth videlicet./

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation hee saith that the
shipp the Endeavour came to Quinborowe on Satterday
the 30th of July last and that hee this deponent
had one hundred fiftie odd quarters of wheate being parte of five hundred quarters of wheate which was to be laden aboard the sayd shipp the Endeavour ready laden and lying on board
his hoye at ffeversham for the Accompte of the arlate Mr ffairfax
at least three weekes before the comeing of the sayd
shipp to Quinborowe to be laden on board the sayd shipp whensoever
the same shold there arrive and that on the Monday the
first of August last hee this deponent having notice that the sayd
Shipp was come to Quinborowe came on Tuesday in the morning the second of the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.323v Annotate
the sayd moneth of August to Quinborowe with the sayd one
hundred fifty odd quarters of wheate with intente to deliver the 
same on board the sayd shipp but the arlate Jope the master of
the sayd shipp the Endeavour told this deponent that hee was not then
ready to receave the same aboard till hee had heaved some ballast
over board whereupon this deponent was forced to come to an
Anchor untill the afternoone of that day, and in the afternoone of that
day the sayd Jope receaved parte of the sayd wheate on board the sayd
shipp and the rest on the Wednesday the third day of the sayd month
and this deponent having unladed all the corne hee had then
on board returned back to ffaversham to fetch more
and on the Satterday next followeing
being the 6th of the sayd moneth of August hee this deponent went
againe to Quinborowe and brought an other parcell of corne
(which with some that one John Mitchell in the meane tyme brought
and laded on board the sayd shipp as this deponent hath heard the sayd
Mitchell say) made up the full ladeing of three hundred quarters
of wheate which the sayd shipp was to take in for Mr ffairfax'
Accompte And further to this article hee cannot depose saving hee
saith that the sayd Mr ffairfaxe (by reason the sayd shipp remained
at Quinborowe soe longe after hee this deponent tooke
in the first ladeing of the sayd corne) did pay unto this deponent
for demorage fower pounds five shillings sterling

To the 7th article of the sayd allegation hee saith that hee well remem
breth that upon the sayd sixth day and alsoe for two dayes [?Next ?following]
the winde and weather was good to have carried the sayd shippe the
Endeavour into the downes in persuanace of her voyage to
Spaine And further saving his foregoeing depositions to which
hee referreth hee cannot depose./

To the rest of the articles of the sayd allegation he
is not examined by direction of the producent/

the marke of
Edward [INITIALS] Watson

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatorie hee answereth negatively to each
part thereof./

To the second Interrogatorie hee saith that upon the sixth day  [?XXX]
last whilest this deponent attended with his hoye at Quinborowe to
deliver the last parcell of corne on board the shipp the Endeavour which
was to be delivered on board the same for the sayd Mr ffairfax [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.324r Annotate
hee this deponent sawe and well knoweth that there were certaine packs or
bales or ffardles of goods delivered on board the sayd shipp the Endeavour
and till they were shipped the takeing in of part
of this deponents then ladeing of corne was by the sayd Jope and his company
deferred, but for whose Accompte the sayd packs bales or fardles were
laded hee this deponent knoweth not And further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot
depose./

To the third Interrogatorie hee saith is concerneth him not to answere thereto for that
hee hath not deposed to the 4th article therein mentioned./

To the 4th Interrogatorie hee saith that one Mr Prippe did in the behalfe of the
Interrogated Mr ffairfax hyre of this deponent one hoye (and as this deponent hath heard
and beleeveth hired of one John Mitchell of ffeversham one other hoye) for the carrying
the Corne predeposed to Quinborowe and saith that the corne which his this
deponents hoye carried was in this deponents presence put on board his sayd
hoye at ffeversham and hee this deponent came with the same to Quinborowe
the day predeposed of, And this deponent hath heard that the sayd Mitchell laded
that parte of the sayd Corne by him carried, at Milton six myles off of ffeversham,
And further saving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth him
selfe hee cannot depose./

To the 5th hee saith it concerneth him not to answere thereto for that hee
hath not deposed to the article therein mentioned/

To the 6th hee saith that as hee hath predeposed, hee was not at Quinborowe
when the sayd Jope with his shipp first arrived there but came thither with
the first corne on Tuesday morning next after the arrivall of the sayd shipp,
which was as soone as this deponent could come, having noe notice of the
sayd shipps arrivall untill the Monday precedeing, and saith that hee this deponent
delivered the last corne on board the sayd Jopes shipp the Endeavour at
Quinborowe on Satterday next after, being the 6th day of August last,
and saith the sayd Jope stayed with his sayd shipp at Quinburow after
the sayd last corne receaved about two dayes And further to this Interrogatorie
saving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth hee cannot depose,
saving hee saith the Interrogated Mr ffairefax was not at Quinborowe that hee
knoweth of./

To the 7th and 8th hee saith it concerneth him not to answere to them for that
hee hath not deposed to the articles therein mentioned./

To the 9th hee saith that hee hath heard and beleeveth that about the tyme Interrate
and before and since there hath bin often pressing of Seamen for the service of
this Commonwealth And further to this Interrogatorie hee cannot depose

To the 10th hee saith that hee hath in his foregoeing deposition (to which hee
referreth) satisfied the contents of this Interrogatorie soe farr as hee can saving
hee saith hee this deponent brought in his hoy at his first comeing about
halfe the Corne intended to be laded by the sayd Mr ffairefax
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.324v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The 19th day of November 1653/

Jope against ffairefax)
Ba Smith) [CHECK]

Examined on an allegation on the behalfe of the
sayd Jope/

6

Robert Newman of Redderiff in the County
of Surrey Mariner Master of the Ship the
Teneriff Merchant aged 42 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.325r Annotate
aforesayd from the Councell of State or other supreme authority
And further to this article saving his subsequent deposition hee cannot
depose.

To the 10th 11th 12th and 14th articles of the sayd allegation Hee saith and
deposeth that hee this deponent being then upon the downes
and having soe bin from the first day of the sayd Moneth but desiauabled
to proceede on his voyage for that divers of his men were after his
coming on the downes pressed from on board his sayd shipp the Tenriff
Merchant for the service of this Commonwealth) did see the sayd Jope
come with his shipp the Endeavour

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.326r Annotate
the same shall still continue n fore and that neither ffreighters nor
Owners nor any else therein interessed shall be any way preiudiced or
molested by each other for any thing by reason of the sayd Imbargoe
And this deponent hath alsoe seene new Charterparties made betweene
the Masters Owners and ffreighters of the Supply, and the Peter and John
whereby they have conditioned to give the sayd Master and
Owner of the sayd shipps in recompense of their losses by reason of
the Imbargoe aforesayd 2 s 6 d a tonne more then they were to have
by the former Charterparty And further to this article hecannot depose./

To the 21th and 22th articles hee saith and deposeth that hee knoweth that
since the 17th of September arlate the arlate William Jope hath
vicualled his shipp and done his utmost endeavour to proceed
on the voyage arlate the reason of such his knowledge is for that
hee this deponent sawe him setting up his beefe for such his victualling
and came downe in Company with him with this deponents shipp
belowe Gravesend but the winde after their arrivall there turned
Easterly and soe continued untill about the 18th or 20th of October
last before
which day a generall Imbargoe to stay all shipps from proceeding
on their voyages came, which Imbargoe continued in force and was
not released till about the 15th of this instant November soe
that by reason of the windes proveing soe contrary for soe longe
tyme togeather the sayd Jope his shipp alsoe this deponent and his
shipp and divers other shipps were before the winde proved fayre
stayed by the sayd last Imbargoe And further to these articles hee
cannot depose./

Repeated before doctors Clarke and
doctors Godolphin/
----
The 12th of december 1653./

In the behalfe of Marshall and)
[?XXX] in a businesse of assurance)
touching the same.)

Rp.

John Taylor of Topsham in the County of devon
Master of the Shipp the ffame a witnes sworne and
examined upon certaine Interrogatories on the behalfe
of James marshall and James Pearce of Exeter Merchants
concerning their losses in the sayd shipp the ffame and her
ladeing saith and deposeth as followeth./

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee well
knoweth the shipp the ffame Interrate and was and is Owner of an eighth part
of her and her tackle and furniture and well knoweth that the Interrate James Marshall and James Pearce
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.326v Annotate
were and are Owners each of them of one 4th parts of the sayd shipp her
tackle apparell and furniture and this hee knoweth, for that hee this deponent
caused the sayd shipp to be built, and after the building thereof his [?XXX]
sold to the sayd Marshall and [?Peirce] their sayd quarter parts of the same And [?XXX]
saith that when the sayd shipp went and was last at Newfoundland upon a
voyage for ffish, hee this deponent went in her as and was [?XXX]
of her and departed from Topsham on the sayd voyage the 3th day of June last past being [?XXX] was from thence bound to the Port of [?Saint]
Lucar Interrate and further to these Interrogatories hee cannot depose saving his subsequent depositions and saving that [?XX]
and Owner of an Eighth parte hee this deponent, and the sayd Marshall and
Pearce for Owners of each of them a fowerth part of the sayd shipp
tackle and furnityre have bin and are commonly accompted and reputed./

[ADD DATA]

Interrogate James Marshall and Jaes Pearce at Newfound land Interrate [?XXX]
and put on board the sayd shipp the ffame a certaine quantitie of ffish to be
thence transported to Saint Lucar Interrogate

[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

2

Christopher Dore of Exeter in the County of devon
Merchant aged 25 yeares or thereabouts a [?witness]
sworne and examined upon certaine Interrogatories on behalfe
of James Marshall and James Pearce of [?Exeter]
Merchants concerning their losses in the shipp the [?ffame] of
Topsham and her ladeing saith and deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.327r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 18th day of January 1653.

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the
Lord Protector

Thomas Hammond of crouched ffryers
London merchant, aged 23 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.328r Annotate
H.H.H.

The fifth of December 1653

Moses Goodyeare against the shipp the)
Pidgeon (whereof William Hassan)
is pretended Master) as belonging to)
himselfe and against the sayde)
Hazan and all so against John Giles)
comeing in for his Interest. Smith)
ffrancklin Allen)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd John Giles

Rp EA

Thomas Wethers of Wapping in the
County of Middlesex Mariner Master of the shipp
James of London aged 30 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet./

To the 1. 2. 3 and 4th Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that being
att the port of Puenta Demas in Gallicia within the Dominions of the
King of Spayne about the latter end of december and beginning of
January 1648. he then and there saw the arlate shipp then called the
John Adventure (and since as it seemes called by some Hopewell, by others
the Pidgeon.) lye in the sayd port in the quiet and peaceable
possession of the arlate Samuel Travis the then Owner thereof
who on or about the seventh day of the sayd month of January for
the somme of two hundred and forty pounds sterling sold alienated
and made over the sayd shipp tackle and furniture to the foresayd
John Giles party in this Cause, by a Bill of sale
which moneyes this deponent saw payd by the sayd Giles to the sayd
Travis, and the sayd Bill thereupon signed sealed and delivered
by the sayd Travis to the sayd Giles for the sayd shipp. And saith that the
schedule to the sayd allegation annexed and now shewne to him this Examinat
was and is the sayd  very originall Bill of sale, and the Contents
thereof were and are true and the same [?and] was really signed sealed
and delivered by the sayd Frowy or his Act and deed to the sayd Giles in the presence of this
deponent and others whose names are subscribed as witnesses att the
foot thereof,
and saith he saw the sayd Travis putt the sayd Giles into the
quiet and actuall possession of the sayd shipp. And further saith that
the sayd shipp in the sayd bill of sale and att the tyme of making thereof
called and knowne by the name of the John Adventure, and the shipp
Hopewell or Pidgeon now in Controversy aboard which this deponent
hath lately bene in this River of Thames was and is one and the the same
shipp and not diverse. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth and seventh Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that the sayd John Giles having bought the sayd shipp and her tackle
and furniture as aforesayd continued in the quiet possession of her till
about the latter end of the summer 1651. about which tyme this deponent
happening to be att Brest in ffrance saw the sayd shipp there arrive and
John Giles in her as Master, who then acquainted this deponent that he was
driven in thither by a Turkes man of warr. And saith the sayd John Giles
of this deponents sight was in the quiet possession of the sayd shipp att rest
aforesayd for some tyme, and that soone after he saw the sayd shipp with her lading violently taken
out of his possession by the Governour of Brest but upon what ground hee
knoweth not, and saw the sayd Giles himselfe and shipps Companie
violently seized on and imprisoned by the sayd Governour, but how longe they
were so deteyned knoweth not. And beleiveth from that tyme to this present in the
sayd shipp hath bene kept out of the quiet possession of the sayd John Giles. And further
he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.328v Annotate
To the eighth and nynth articles of the sayd allegation he referreth himselfe
to the Acts of this Court and otherwise saving his foregoeingd deposition
cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatory he saith he knoweth the shipp Hopewell interrate
now in question and so hath done from december 1648. but neyther [?XXX]
pretends to have any interest in her or any part of her.

To the 2 Interrogatory he saith he knoweth not how long the sayd shipp ddid
continue in the hands of ffrench men nor whether she were in ffrance
condemned as prize and saving his forefoeing depositions cannot
furthed depose.

To the 3. he saith he neyther knoweth beleiveth or hath heard any thing to the
effect interrate.

To the 4th Interrogatory he saith he hath not heard nor beleiveth nor did heare
that the sayd William Hazzard bought the sayd shipp att Dunkirke nor that [?XXXXX]
in her as Master from thence, nor that he unladed his goods in the River of
Thames, nor that he or any for him or his use are now in the [?XXX]
actuall possession of her. and further otherwise than negatively cannot depose

To the 5th Interrogatory This deponent saith that about a
fortnight agoe he this Rendent saw a man in possession of the sayd
shipp in the name on the behalfe and for the use of the interrate [?XXX]
Giles. and otherwise cannot depose

[##] [LH MARGIN, AT 90 DEGREES]
saving that he heard one Mr Thomas Prince a merchant of
this Citty say that he having bene in Company with the sayd
William Hazard he the sayd Hazzard told him the sayd Mr Prince
that he [?XXX] the sayd Hazard brought the sayd shipp from Dunkirke and payd not
a penny for her or to that effect.
[MARKE]
Thomas Wethers
his marke 

Thomas Wethers
his [MARKE] marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Doctor Godolphin)
----
The sixth day of December 1653

Richard Hill, John Hallett, John Gregory
and Company against whatsoever Currants)
brought to this port of London in the shipp)
the John Bonadventure whereof [BLANK] Chamlet)
is Master belonging to George ffarington and)
against John Gold comeing in for his Interest)
in the sayd Currants and against John Gold)
in particular and all others appearing for)
him Smith ffrancklin)

Smith dt.

Thomas Broome of the parish of
White Chappell in the County of Middlesex
Mariner aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation or Libell This deponent saith that
in the monethes of May June July August September October November
december January ffebruary and march 1651, and in March 1652
arlate Richard Hill. John Hallet, John Gregory and Companie [?were ?and]
att thsi present ought to be the true and lawfull Owners of the arlate [?shipp]
called the Agreement whereof Giles Lawrence was Master or Commander
and of her tackle Apparell and furniture. the premisses he knoweth [for ?that]
he this deponent was Masters mate of the sayd shipp, and the sayd Giles
Lawrence was Master and Commander of her the tyme aforesayd and in [?charge]
of her for and in and on the behalfe of the sayd Hill Hallet Gregorie
and Company, and so commonly accounted. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second third and fourth Articles of the sayd Libell or allegation [?This ?Rendent]
saith that in the yeares and monethes aforesayd respectively the sayd
Roger Hatton resident at Naples was the factor and Agent of the sayd
Hallet and Company and so accounted, and that in december 1651 [?this]
deponent and the sayd Giles Lawrence were att Naples with the [?sayd]
shipp being to follow the order of the sayd Roger Hatton [?XXXX]
shipp by direction of the foresayd Owners, and that he [?XXXXXXXXXXXXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.329r Annotate
there that the arlate George ffarington had lately bene att Naples
and that he had there videlicet att Naples before a Notary Publique there
living by Contract solemnly made before the sayd Notary betweene them
the sayd George ffarington and the forsayd Roger
Hatton, really and truly promised concluded and agreed to and with
the sayd Roger Hatton the factor or Agent of the sayd Hill Hallet and
Company that the sayd George ffarington or his Agents would
deliver unto and aboard such shipp or shipps as he the sayd Roger
Hatton should send to receyve the same in the port of Petras the number
of one thousand one hundred salmes of oyles of Galipoly measure
att or before the end of January 1652 new stile att a price then
agreed upon betweene them cleare of all Charges for the use and
Accompt of the sayd Hill Hallett and Company. And saith he knoweth
that the sayd Contract was really and truly made not onely by the
relation of the sayd Roger Hatton in december 1651. as aforesayd, but
allso for that he saw a true Copie of the Origniall contract extracted
out of the Notaries Protocoll who first wrote and drew up the same
and allso for that he heard the sayd George ffarington himselfe
acknowledge and confesse the same att Zante in the presence of this
deponent, and afterwards saw him acknowledge the same in a writing
under his hand signed by him the sayd ffarington in the sight and
presence of this deponent the sayd Giles Lawrence Thomas Parsons John
ffollet (which Parsons and ffollet are since slayne) and one Solomon Bywas
a Jew. And further cannot depose

To the fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the arlate Roger Hatton according to and in pursuance of the
foresayd Agreement or Contract concerning the sayd olyles did in the
sayd moneth of december order and direct the saud Giles Lawrence to
sayle and carry the sayd shipp the Agreement to Petras to receyve
and take in the sayd oyles, and by the wat ordered and directed him the
sayd Giles Lawrence to touch att Zant and there to say 24. howres
to receyve the advise and direction of the sayd George ffarington
concerning the sayd oyles according to the contract above mentioned
And that accordingly the sayd Giles Lawrence did sett sayle from Naples
touching att Messina by the way and so to Zant with the sayd shipp the
Agreement, and carryed in her so many peices of 8/8 as amounted
in sterling money to 4593 li. 15 s, being in all seventeene
thousand and five hundred peices of eight more or lesse [?the] which
moneyes he the sayd Hatton putt into her as and for the money of
and to and for the accompt of the sayd Richard Hill John Hallett
John Gregory and Company, the same being to pay and satisfty the sayd
George ffarrington for the foresayd 1100 salmes of oyle, and the
sayd shipp arrived  safe att Zant with the sayd moneyes, the premisses
he knoweth to be true being Masters mate of the sayd shipp the
voyage in question and well and particularly acquainted with the designe
and passages aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the seventh eighth and nynth articles of the sayd allegation his deponent saith and
deposeth that after the sayd shipps Arrivall att Zant the foresayd Giles Lawrence
did there acquaint the sayd George ffarington with his order from Mr Hatton
touching the sayd oyles, and that he had money aboard his shipp to pay
for them as they should be delivered aboard, And saith that thereupon the
sayd George ffarrington did then and there signify ad declare unto the
sayd Giles Lawrence that he could not according to his contract and
agreement made with the sayd Roger Hatton furnish the sayd
Lawrence
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.329v Annotate
Lawrence with the sayd 1100 salmes of oyles att Petras, but in case the
sayd Lawrence would sayle with his sayd shipp tp Cronee which was
thirty leagues beyond Petras that then he the sayd ffarington his Correspondents
or Agents would there furnish the same or to the like effect, and the
sayd Giles Lawrence thereto replyed that It was contrary to his [?orders] [?and]
agreement, and likewise contrary to his the sayd ffaringtons Agreement [?with]
the sayd Hatton, and that the sayd place or port of Cronee was a [?place]
of exceeding great danger and adventure by reason of [?Pyratts] [?in]
those parts under and in the name of Turkes, and that upon the sayd [?XXXX]
he would not adventure himself and Company with his shipp and [?company]
aforesayd upon so dangerous and hazardous an imployment. And [??moreover]
saith that thereupon the sayd George ffarington finding the sayd Lawrence
to be scupulous and unwilling to proceed to Cronee, did neere [?unto]
Zant aboard the sayd shipp Agreement rising upon the high sea within
the Jurisdiction of this Court Contract and agree to and with the sayd
Giles Lawrence that in Case he would goe and proceed unto Cronee and
there take in the sayd Oyles then and in such case he the sayd George
ffarington would and did accordingly undertake to secure the [?sayd] [?shipp]
the Agreement and her Company in goeing to Cronee aforesayd, and
there taking in her lading of oyles; and allso the sayd shipp, [?Marriners] [?and]
oyles untill their returne back agayne to Zant, and that in case the sayd
shipp and Company or any part thereof perished or [?XXXXX]
either goeing to Coronee or sayd shipp Company or oyles perished or miscarried in comeing back againe to Zant, that [?XXX]
and in such case he the sayd George ffarington would pay and [?XXXX] [?XXX]
all the sayd dammage thereby arising or to that effect. And did then [?XXXX]
Covenant and undertake that the oyles to be taken in att Coronee should [?be]
as goods as those covenanted to be laden att Petras, or to the selfe same
effect, And saith that upon the sayd Agreement and Contract and [?not]
otherwise the said Giles Lawrence did undertake the sayd voyage [?unto]
Coronee, the premisses this deponent knoweth being Masters mate
of the sayd shipp and present att, and well and perfecttly remembreth
the sayd Agreement made by the sayd ffarington with the sayd Lawrence
att Zant as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose; saving 
the sayd Giles Lawrence did upon the receyving of the [?oyles]
aboard att Cronee by order of the sayd ffarington pay into [?Thomas]
dobson partner of the sayd ffarington who made delivery of the sayd
oyles severall summes of moneyes due for the sayd oyles according to
Contract out of the peeces of 8/8 brought in the shipp Agreement
from Naples as aforesayd. this deponent [?seeing] some of the sayd moneyes
and afterwards saw an acquaittance under the hand of the sayd [?XXX]
acknowledging full satisfaction of and for the sayd oyles, which [?were]
att Cronee as is hereafter sett forth.

To the tentha rticle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the foresayd
Contract and Agreemenent for security of the sayd shipp her Company and lading
as aforesayd the sayd Giles Lawrence did depart and sett sayle from Zant [?for]
Coronee and safely arrived there, and after his such arrivall did
on board his sayd shipp Agreement her full lading of oyles
being about one thousand one hundred salmes of oyles, which oyles
laden aboard the saud shipp for the use and Accompt of the sayd [?XXXX]
Hill, John Hallet John Gregory and Company to be brought and
transported in the sayd shipp from Cronee to Zant and so to this [?port]
of London here to be delivered to the sayd Hill Hallet Gregory and
Company, or to their respective Assignees for their use and [?XXX]
And saith that being present att and seeing the sayd oyles [?XXXX]
board the sayd shipp he knoweth the premisses to be true And
otherwise cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.330v Annotate
To the eighteenth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the arlate
John Gold was and is a subiect of this Commonwealth and subiect to the
Jurisdiction of this Court and for and as such Commonly  accompted
reputed and taken. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposicons are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatory he saith he was Masters Mate of the sayd shipp
in and aboard her according to his office the whole voyage in the ship
and otherwise cannot depose

To the 2d Interrogatory he saith he had not nor hath any Interest att all in the
sayd shipp the Agreement nor merchants gods aboard her about which
this suite ariseth. but saith he had and lost in the sayd shipp a small
Adventure of his owne of the value of 30 li. or thereabouts. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d. Interrogatory this Rendent saith that he expecteth his wages for
7 monthes of the sayd voyage whether the plaintiffes prevayle or not
And in case the sayd plaintiffes prevayle he expecteth as for the wages
to the tyme of the sayd shipp was lost amounting to about 20 li and
likewise some satisfaction for his owne losse proportionable to the
satisfaction the sayd Hill Hallet and Company shall receyve and get
upon their foresaid losse. And further otherwise than negatively he cannot 
depose.

To the 4th Interrogatory he saith that the sayd shipp Agreement did safely
arrive att Zant but did not take in her lading there. howbeit 
that some of the mariners of the sayd shipps Company did there take in
some small quantities of Currants for their owne private Adventure
And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposiccons he cannot depose.

To the 5th Interrogatorry This deponent saith that he did see the Agreement [?XXX]
and drawne upp in writeing betweene the sayd ffarington and sayd [?XXX]
att Zant a shipp board And having now perused the schedule to this Interrogatorry
annexed now shewne him, saith It is not the originall draught or
a true coppy exemplar or Counterpart thereof ###

[###] [AT 90 DEGREES TO MAIN TEXT]

which he knoweth for that this deponent did subscribe his name
as a witnes to ye originall Contract;  and that this
paper now shewne him wants one of the principall Covenants
in the sayd originall vdelicet the securing the sayd shipp Mariners
and lading from Corona to Zant which covenant or clause
was of this deponents certaine knowledge in the originall contract
which perished att sea in and with the sayd shipp. And otherwise
he cannot depose

Tho: Browne [SIGNATURE]

Repeated before Dr Clarke)
and Dr Godolphin)
----
The seventh day of December 1653

Moses Goodyeare et cetera)

Tho. Browne [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Rp.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2.

Giles Giles of Ratcliffe in the County of Middlesex
mariner aged 29 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

To the first second third and fourth Articles of the sayd Allegation This
deponent saith that in the Monethes of  December and January [?XXXX]
he this deponent was at Puenta Demas a port of Gallicia in Spaine
and there saw the arlate shipp the John Adventure now called the
Hopewell, and by some the Pidgeon (whichw as and is one and the same shipp under severall names) lye there in that port in the
(possession
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.331r Annotate
possession of the arlate Mr Samuel Travis who then was the lawfull
Owner of the sayd shipp her tackle and furniture and so accounted. And
saith the arlate John Giles was then likewise there and about the
seventh day of the sayd moneth of January 1648 bought the sayd
shipp her tackle and furniture of and from the sayd Samuel Travis
for the summe of 240 li sterling which moneyes this deponent saw
the sayd John Giles att Puenta Demas about the sayd tyme pay to the
sayd Travis for the sayd shipp, and then and there saw the sayd Samuel
Travis in consideration of the summe of 240 li so to him payd and by
him received sell and alienate the sayd shipp tackle and furniture
to the sayd John Giles by a deed or bill of sale. And saith that the schedule
to the sayd allegation annexed and now shewne him this Examinat was
and is the very originall bill of sale, and this deponent saw the
sayd Samuel Travis signe seale and deliver the same as and for
his Act and deed to the sayd John Giles in the presence of him this
deponent and his precontest Thomas Wethers and severall others
whose names are sett or written as witnesses att the foot of the sayd
schedule or bill of sale, And saith the sayd bill of sale is reall and
the Contents thereof true. And further that he saw the sayd Samuel
Travis after sealing and delivery of the sayd bill of sale putt the sayd
John Giles into the actuall and quiet possession of the sayd shipp her
tackle and furniture att Puenta Demes aforesayd in the sayd moneth of
January 1648. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth and sixth article of ye sayd allegation This deponent saith that of his
certaine knowledge the sayd John Giles continued in the quiet possession of
the sayd shipp as master and owner of her for two yeares and an halfe
and upwards after his buying of her as aforesayd. And saith that towards
the latter end of the summer 1651 as this deponent now remembreth
the tyme, the sayd shipp the John Adventure which is now called by
some the Hopewell by others the Pigeon, being upon the high seas
and sayling to her designed Port of Dartmouth (this deponent and
the sayd John Giles being then in and aboard her) was chased by
two Turkes men of warr or Pyratts of Sally, and being over
powered by them was for her safety forced into ye Port of Brest
in ffrance where for some certaine tyme she lay att Anchor and
ye sayd John Giles was for some tyme there in the quiet possession
of her. And further saith he cannot depose

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that whilest the sayd shipp
lay att Brest as aforesayd and within two dayes after her such Arivall
there the Governor of Brest under Colour that ye sayd shipp came from
Spaine or some other iniust pretence violently and forceably seized the
sayd shipp and dispossessed the sayd John Giles of her, and all her lading
then on board her, and imprisoned the sayd John Giles and this deponent
and about 5 or six more of the sayd shipps Company and kept them
in durresse for  seven weekes, and restored not ye sayd shipp to ye sayd
John Giles but kept and deteyned the same from him, by meanes whereof
and the sayd uniust seizure the sayd John Giles hath ever sithence beene
kept out of the quiet possession of his sayd shipp tackel and furniture
And otherwise he cannot depose.
(To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.331v Annotate

To the eighth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
month of November last past  the sayd John Giles having notice
given him by this deponent that the sayd shipp the John Adventure
otherwise the Hopewell otherwise the Pidgeon did ly att anchor in the
River of Thames did casue and procure the sayd shipp to be arrested
by a warrant of this Court as belonging to himselfe, And the sayd
shipp doth still lye under the sayd Arrest: the premisses he knoweth
seeing the sayd arrest made. And otherwise cannot depose

To ye last he saith his depositions are true.

To ye Crosse Interrogatorries

To the first he saith he knoweth the sayd shipp the Hopewell. and otherwise
negatively.

To ye second he saith the sayd shipp was taken by the ffrench as aforesayd but
how long she continued in their power knoweth not and saith she was not [?condemned]
in ffrance as prize so farr as this Rendent knoweth beleiveth or hath
heard And further otherwise than negatively cannot depose

To the third Interrogatorry he saith he never heard beleiveth nor doth knowe any
thinge to ye effect interrate.

To the fourth and fifth Interrogatoryes he saith he hath heard and beleiveth that the sayd
William Hazzard came Master of the sayd shipp from Dunqirke to this
River. and heard some of his Company sat he bought the same att
Dunkirke for 300 guilders, but saith he doth not beleive it to be true
for that he hath creadibly heard that the sayd Hazzard himselfe hath
acknowledged to Mr Prince that he payd nothing for the sayd shipp
And saith he cannot depose certainly who hath the present possession
of the sayd shipp but beleiveth she is in the possession of John
Giles by authority of this Court. And otherwise he cannot depose

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Dorctor Godolphin)

Giles 'G' Giles
his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The eighth day of December 1653

Hill and others et etera)

Examined upon the sayd Allegation

2)

Captaine Giles Lawerence of Ratcliffe in the county 
of Middlesex late master of the shipp the Agreement aged 35 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in
the monethes of May June July August September October
November December January ffebruary and march 1651 and
March 1652. the arlate Richard Hill John Hallett John Gregrory
and Companie all merchants of London, were the true and [?XXX]
Owners and proprietors of the arlate shipp the Agreement her tackle
Apparrell and furniture, videlicet to ye tyme she was with her lading
blowne up and perished in the seas as is hereafter sett forth and
for and as such the sayd Richard Hill, John Hallett John
Gregory and Companie were commonly accounted reputed and taken
the premisses This deponent knoweth to be true for that he was
Master of her the voyage in question and was appoynted so to be by the
foresayd Owners, and had the possession Governance and [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.332r Annotate
of her and in the name and behalfe of the foresayd Owners
who about six yeares now past caused the sayd shipp to be built
att Deptford, in this River for their owne use and Accompt And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
yeares and monethes aforesayd the arlate Roger Hatton Resident att
Naples was the ffactor or Agent and Correspondent of the sayd Richard
Hill John Hallet John Gregory and Company and acted and did
their busines att Naples and elsewhere in those parts as their factor
And for such the sayd Roger Hatton then was commonly accounted
reputed and taken, and somuch this deponent hath well knowne and
observed att his being att Naples, having prticular direction to follow
the order of the sayd Mr Hatton in the management of the sayd shipp
for the Advantage of the sayd Owners in those parts./

To the third Article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he this
deponent in and with his sayd shipp the Agreement arrived att
Naples in the moneth of December 1651 and there remained about
the space or neere a moneth, and then and there understood aswell by the sayd
Roger Hatton, who then residing att Naples, as by others that
the arlate George ffarington had bene there not long before, and
had contracted and agreed with the sayd Roger Hatton to ye effect
hereafter sett forth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That
before the month of december aforesayd 1651. the arlate George
ffarington att Naples before a Notary there living did by vertue
of a sale and Contract made before the sayd Notary betweene him
the sayd George ffarington and the foresayd Roger Hatton, really
and truly promise conclude Covenant and Agree to and with the
sayd Roger Hatton the factor or Agent of the sayd Hill Hallet
Gregory and Company to the effect following, that is to say that
he the sayd George ffarington or his Agents on his behalfe should
and would deliver or cause to be delivered unto or aboard said
shipp or shipps as he the sayd Roger Hatton should send to receyve
the same in the Port of Petras in Morea, one thousand and one
hundred salme of oyles of Gallipoly measure att or before the
latter end of January 1652 new stile att a price then agreed upon
betweene them, the premisses this deponent knoweth to be true for
that att Naples he saw and had in his possession a Copie of the
sayd Originall Contract in the Italian tongue extracted out of
the Protocoll of the Notary Publique who had drawne the same upp
and likewise a translation of the originall Contract or to that effect, and
that himselfe had really and truly covenanted promised and agreed
as in the same was conteyned videlicet to the effect by him this deponent
now sett forth And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the sayd
moneth of December 1651. the arlate Roger Hatton in pursuance
of the sayd Agreement made betwixt the sayd George ffarington
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.332v Annotate
and him concerning the sayd oyles did order and direct him this
deponent to sayle and carry the sayd shipp the Agreement to Petras
aforesayd thereto take in the sayd oyles, and by the way ordered this
deponent to call or touch at Zant and there to stay 24 howres
to receive particulr advise and direction of and from the sayd
George ffarington concerning the sayd oyles according to the
Contract and Agreement aforementioned. And otherwise cannot
depose

To the sixth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
according to ye directions of the sayd Roger Hatton he this deponent
sett sayle from Naples with the sayd shipp Agreement in th emoneth of
January 1651, old stile or 1652. new stile and arrived with her
att Zant and carryed in her from Naples and Messina where he called by the way to Zant the number of
seventeen thosant peeces of eight making in sterling money the
summe of four thousand one hundred pounds sterling as the exchange then went att Naples which money the
sayd Roger Hatton putt into ye sayd shipp as and for the proper moneyes
of the sayd Richard Hill John Hallett John Gregry and Company
and were to pay for the sayd 1100 salmes of oyles. And saith
that the sayd shipp and moneyes in her safely arrived att Zant
under the Commannd of this deponent And othewise cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent sith that this
deponent did pay the summe of sixteen thousand seven hundred forty five peices of eight for the oyles
laden aboard the sayd shipp in manner hereafter sett forth, to
the sayd George ffaringtons Orer, or partner and Correspondent
att Corona or Coronee by the speciall direction of him the sayd ffarington
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the eighth atrticle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that presently after
such tyme as the sayd shipp Agreement came and arrived att Zant
as aforesayd, the sayd George ffarington declared to him this deponent
that he could not according to his Contract with Roger Hatton
aforesayd furnish him this deponent with the sayd one thousand
and one hundred salmes of oyles att Petras, but sayd that in case
he this deponent would goe with his shipp to a place called Corona 
or Cortonee being a Port about 30 leagues beyond Petras, that
then he the sayd ffarington or his Agents would there furnish
the same or to the like effect And saith that he this deponent
thereupon replyed that it was Contrary to this deponents Order and
Agreement and likewise Contrary to ye sayd ffaringtons Agreement
made with the sayd Roger Hatton as aforesayd or to that effect, And
more over sayd that ye sayd port of Corona was a place of great
danger and of dangerous [Accosse] in regard of the Turkes
or Pyratts plying in those parts, and that for theis  sayd reasons he
would not goe to Corona unlesse he were fully and abslutely
secured for himselfe Company shipp and lading. And otherwise he
cannot depose

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that thereupon
the sayd George ffarington finding and perceyeving that this
deponent would not adventure upon the sayd ymployment to Corona
without a perfect security did aboard the sayd shipp Agreement
riding att Zant uupon the high seas within  the Jurisdiction of this
Court Contract Covenant and agree to and with this deponent
in case he this deponent would proceed and goe unto the sayd [?port]
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.333r Annotate
of Coronee and there take in the sayd oyles that he the sayd George
Ffarrington would and did accordingly to the summe or value of twelve
thousand pounds sterling undertake to secure the sayd shipp and 
Companie in going thither and there taking in the sayd oyles
and allso the sayd shipp this deponent his shipps Company and oyles
until their returne back againe to Zant; and in case the sayd
shipp and company or any of them or the sayd oyles or any part
thereof perished or miscarried in such their goeing to or
returning from [Corona] then he the sayd George Harrington 
would pay and satisfy the s[ay]d damage so far as 12 thousand pound
sterling extended or to [the] same effect, And saith that he the s[ay]d Ffarrington
did then further undertake that the oyles so to be taken in att [Coronae]
should be as good and merchantable as those covenanted to be laden
att Petras would or should have bene or to the like effect. And further
that the sayd contract for the better evidence of the truth and certainty
thereof was drawne upp in writing in the presence of this deponent 
and his precontest Thomas Broome and others some whereof are since
dead being slayne in the fight hereafter mentioned. And saith that
this deponent upon the sayd Agreement and security so given
and made by the sayd Ffarrington and not otherwise did adventure 
upon and undertake the sayd voyage and imployment to [Coronae] aforsayd.
And otherwise cannot depose./

To the tenth article of the sayd [allegation] This deponent saith that after such
tyme as the sayd George Ffarrington had promised and contracted
as aforsayd for security of the sayd shipp and company and oyles
he the deponent sett sayle with his ship from Zant to Corona or Cronee and there
safely arrived, and after her Arrivall there, did there take on board 
her about one thousand sixty three salmes and a halfe being
one hundred ninety seven tonnes of oyles. And saith the same were laden
for the proper use and Accompt of the sayd Richard Hill, John
[Hallett], John Gregory and Company to be brought and transported
in the sayd shipp from [Coronae] to Zant and so to London and there
to be delivered to them or their agents for their use and accompt
by him this deponent who receyved the sayd oyles aboard for the Accompt
aforsayd. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the eleventh article of the said allegation This deponent saith that presently
upon the lading and putting the sayd oyles on board the sayd shipp the
Agreement as aforsayd the sayd shipp Agreement did depart and sett sayle
therewith directly towards Zant from [Corona] aforsayd, and in her course
and direct way for Zant was mett with by five pyratts shipps of 
Tripoly manned with [Mahamadans] and Renegades and after three
howres fight with them was with her sayd oyles blowne upp and
perished in the seas, and some of the sayd shipps company were slayne
in fight, And this deponent and the rest that remained alive were taken
prisoners by the sayd pyratts and carried to Tripoly and there made
slaves and continued many moneths in great misery [videlicet] this deponent
himself for 14 moneths and upwards, and some of the shipp’s
company, [videlicet] ten or thereabouts from the tyme of the loss of
their sayd shipp which was about the 28th day of March 1652 to
this present tyme, and are like still there to remaine, in great slavery
And otherwise cannot depose./					To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.333v Annotate
To the twelfth arlate the sayd allegation This Deponent saith that att the
tyme at the sayd shipp the Agreement and hersayd lading of oyles
were mett with blowne upp and sunke by the Pyratts of Tripoly
aforesaid she was in her direct Course from Coronee to Zant
and was not come to Zant by att the least fourteen or fifteen
leagues or thereabouts which he knoweth being then present with
her as aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the thirteenth article of the sayd allegation This Deponent saith that the sayd
shipp the Agreement att the tyme of her bloweing upp or sinking 
aforesayd was of the burthen of 200 Tonnes, and had in her 18 peeces
of Ordinance, and the sayd shipp with her tackle apparell furniture
and provisions the tyme aforesaid were well worth the same of two
thowsnd pounds of lawfull money of England, which
he knoweth being then Master of the sayd shipp. And that the sayd
oyles then on board the sayd shipp and that perished with her were
att that tyme of the Cleare value of five thousand twenty [?three]
pounds ten shillings sterlinge which he knoweth for that the
payd somuch for the same to Thomas Dobson the partner or Correspondent
of the sayd George ffarnington by the order of him the sayd ffarington
And saith that in case the sayd oyles had arrived safely att LOndon
they would have yeilded a far greater value or price, oyles att
that tyme being sold att high rates in this Citty. And othwrwise
cannot depose./

To the 14th  article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in case the
sayd George ffarington had provided his oyles ready att Petras
there to have bene laden according as by his foresyd Agreement with Mr Hatton as hee
was bound to have done, and had not ordered the sayd shipp to goe
to Coronee to lade the sayd oyles there as he did, in all likelyhood
and probability the sayd shipp and oyles had not bene taken by the
sayd Pyrats of Tripoly, but had come safe to London, And saith
that the way or passage betwixt Petras and Coronee is a place
of exceeding great danger by reson of Turkes, and Pyratts of
Tripoly who doe usually lye thereabouts, and so are observed to doe by
such as use those seas, and somuch this deponent did signify to ye sayd
George ffarington before he undertooke ye sayd voyage from Zant
as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifteeneth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
Richard Hill, John Hallett, John Gregory and Companie by reason
of the losse of the sayd shipp and oyles have suffered and sustained
losse and damage to ye summe or value of eleven thousand poundes
which he knoweth aswell for the reasons aforeayd wherein he hath
sett forth the value of the sayd shipp the quanmtity of the oyles and the
price thereof the first penny, and for that the price of oyles of the
best sort and quality were about that tyme sold here att London att the
rate of 43 or 44 pounds. and for somuch commonly and usually sold
as this deponent hath bene credibly given to understand ad verey
beleiveth And otherwise cannot depose

To the sixteent article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith hee cannot
depose saving that he hath seene a letter written from Zant from
John Dobson brother of the sayd Thomas Dobson to him the sayd [?XXX]
([?wherein]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.334r Annotate
wherein was signifyed that the sayd George ffarington had
laden aboard a shipp in Zant a great quantitye of Currants and consigned
the same for London, and that he had or was like to gaine by the sayd
Currants, five and twenty thousand dollars or to yt effect which letter
this deponent saw att Tripoly this last yeare in the hands of the sayd
Thomas Dobson who then was and still is a prisoner there, and conceyveth
and beleiveth that the sayd shipp in that letter meant and intended
was and is the arlate shipp the John Bonadventure whereof Samuell
Chamlett was master and Commannder; and saving he heard ye same or to ye
like effect att Leghorne by freind or Correspondent of the sayd ffaringtons there

To the 17th Article of the sayd allegation he referreth himselfe to ye Acts of
this Court, and otherwise cannot depose./

To the 18 Article of the sayd allegation This deponent sith that ye sayd John
Gold was and is a subiect of this Commonwealth and subiect to ye Jurisidic
tion of this Court and for and as such Commonly accounted reputed
and taken. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 19. Article of the sayd allegation he saith his foregoeing deposiccons are
true. And otherwise cannot depose.

To ye Crosse Interrogatories/

To the first Interrogatory This Rendent saith he was in the sayd shipp the Agreement
the voyage in question wherein she was lost as aforesayd and was master of her
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2d Interrogatory he saith he had not any part share or interest in the sayd
shipp the Agreement or any of the lading of oyles above in this his
depositions sett forth, but saith he had aboard the sayd shipp when she
was lost as aforesaid a small adventure of his owne to say about two
tonnes of oyles of the value 85 dollars per tonne the first penny
and about one thousand weight of Currants worth about 30 dollars
the first penny, and in sylver the quantity of about four or five hundred
dollars. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d Interrogatory this Rendent saith that in case the sayd Mr Hill Mr Hallet
and Companie prevayle in this suit he expecteth some benefit thereby
that is to say for wages due to him as Master of the sayd shipp the
voyage in question the summe of fifty pounds sterling or thereabouts. and
otherwise negatively, saving that in such case he likewise
expecteth some satisfaction for his owne particular losse proportionable
to what the sayd Owners shall recover upon their generall losse
And further cannot depose.

To the fourth Interrogatory This Rendent saith that ye said shipp the
Agreement did during the voyage in question safely arrive att Zant
but did not there take in her lading, but saith that this Rendent did there
take in his Currants aforesayd and his shipps Company did there in
like sort take in some small quantities of Currants for their private
Adventures respectively, which sayd Currants did afterwrds come
safely in the sayd shipp to Corona. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the fifth Interrogatory This deponent saith that he saw the Agreement
libellated made betweene the sayd George ffarington and this Rendent
after ye same was drawne up in writeing as aforesayd. And to ye schedule
to ye sayd Interrogatorries annexed, and now shewne to this Examinat
he saith, That upon this Rendents comeing to Zant as aforesayd and
upon his Refuseing to goe to Corona without perfect security, the sayd
George ffarington on or about the eighth day of ffebruary 1652
new stile did tende to this  deponent the sayd paper or schedule
now shewne him signed by the sayd George ffarington, wherto
this
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.334v Annotate

Rendent likewise sett his hand yet upon Condicon not to be
preiudiced thereby unlesse upon dilligent perusall its hould [?XXX]
to be a full and perfect security, And saith that thereupon the sayd
George ffarington desired this Rendent to advise and consider
of it till the next day and that in case It did not appeare [?perfect]
enough and satisfactory he the sayd George ffarington would
make such a one as should give full satisfaction in that behalfe
and declared that this sayd paper so signed by this Rendent should
not preiudice him or be binding to him till he should after a
diligent perusall thereof and with the advise of his shipps Company
declare it to be full and sufficient. And saith that thereupon this
Rendent did communicate the sayd schedule or paper now shewne him
to his shipps Company and that after diligent perusall fidning that
thereinw as security given for the sayd shipp and Companies goeng to and
staying att Corona and not for their Returne from thense back againe
to Zant, It was generally resolved by this Rendent and shipps Company
not to be sufficient, and the shipps Company absolutely refused to goe
to Corona unlesse themselves shipp and lading were secured back to
Zant. And thereupon saith that the next day being the nynth of
ffebruary 1652. new stile This Rendent rendred up the paper now
shewne him to ye sayd ffarington as insufficient and noe way
satisfactory, and that the sayd George ffarington did then prpmise
to give a more full obligaccon and security videlicet not only to secure
the sayd shipp and her Company to Corona and att the sayd place, but
likewise to secure the same from all perills back againe from Corona to returne
with the sayd oyles to Zant, and accordingly did thereupon make
and deliver to this Rendent anotherobligation or writing of
security to ye same effect videlicet to ye effect libellate and by this
Rendent in his deposition sett forth, And the sayd latter obligation
or writing of security was accepted by this Rendent and shipps Company
as full and perfect and not this now shewne him, which hee saith by the
vertue of his oath is not the Agreement libellat nor a true exemplar
Copy or Counterpart thereof, and was and is to be a voyd paper and
of none effect and somuch the sayd ffarington did att Zant promise this
Rendent It should be ad that he would Cancell it, or to the same
effect. And otherwise cannot depose./

Repeated before Dr Clerke}
and Dr Godolphin)

per Gyles Lawrance [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The tenth day of December 1653

Thomas Coulscott Administrator of John Coulscott)
deceased against John Lyne. ffrancklin)
Suckly)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe 
of the sayd John Lyne

Rp. [?Suckley dt.]

Thomas Fletcher of Lymehouse in the County of
Middlesex Mariner aged 37. yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that John
Coulscot and John Coulson were persons both well knowne to this deponent
and were two severall persons and not one and the same person [###]

[###] sayd John Coulscott ye
same tyme serving the
King of Portugall in the
shipp the Beverdo as is
hereafter sett forth.

the sayd John Coulson serving in ye Sampson John Lyne Commannder in the yeare 1649. [?XXXXXX]

And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent sith that in the yeares
[?XXX]

~~~
HCA 13/68 f.335r Annotate
1648. 1649 and 1650. and moneths therein for which tyme wages
is demannded in this Cause by the arlate Thomas Coulscott, one John
Coulscott whose Administrator this deponent taketh the sayd Thomas to be
did serve in a shipp belonging to the King of Portugall in his service
called the [?Noce Beverdoe]. the premisses this deponent knoweth for
that he wa masters mate of the shipp Sarah of London which in the sayd
yeare 1648 was freighted by Portugueses att Lisbon for a voyage to ye Brazil, and
att Lisbon in the sayd yeare saw the sayd John Coulscott shim himselfe aboard
the sayd shipp Noe Beverdo, and depart in her from Lisbon towards the West
Indies, whither the sayd shipp Sarah was likewise bound, and saith that after
the arrivall of the Sarah and this deponent in her at Brasilia in the sayd
indies, he this deponent saw the sayd shipp Noe Beverdo there likewise arrive
and the sayd John Coulscott in her about the latter end of the yeare 1648
videlicet about Christmas ofg the same yeare, and then and there understood aswell
by the sayd John Coulscott as others that the sayd shipp the Beverdo in her
passage from Lisbon to ye Brasilia lost her Rudder and was therefore forced
to putt into Angola, and that [?XXX] then came immediately, or directly from
Angola to Brazeel. And saith that the sayd John Coulscott did in the yeares
1649 and 1650 continue att Brazeal in the service of the sayd King of
Portugall in the sayd shipp Noe Beverdo being all that tyme a Man of
warr and so made and appoynted by the Governour of Brazeel soone after
her Arrivall there which he knoweth being for all the sayd tyme	 deteyned
att Brazeel And saith that from Brasilia the sayd John Coulscott
served and sayled in the sayd shipp Noe Beverdo to Lisbone and
there arrived towards the latter end of the yeare 1651. videlicet about the
moneth of december of the same yeare, this deponent about the same tyme
arriving att Lisbone in a shipp of the fleet convoyed from Brasilia by
the sayd Noe Beverdo and other Portugues shipps of warr. And moreover
saith that about 4 or 5 monethes after the arrivall of the sayd ffleet att
Lisbone the foreayd John Coulscott did fall in a quarrell att Lisbone with
one of his Comrades and fought with him and ws in that quarrell and
fight slayne, and this deponent was att his funerall and buriall, for
which reasons this deponent saith and knoweth it to be true that during
the sayd yeares 1649. 1650. and 1651. nor any part thereof
the sayd John Coulscott did not serve or sayle as a marriner in the sayd
shipp the Sampson of which the sayd John Lynes was Commannder and
otherwise cannot depose

To the third article of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose nor to any part
thereof.

To the last article of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose nor to any part
thereof

Repeated before Dr Clarke)
and Dr Godolphin)

Thomas ffletcher [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 12th day of December 1653.

Richard Hill John Hallot and Company)
against Currants in the John Bonadventure)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Smith dt

3)

Roger Hatton of Marke lane London merchant aged
32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

(To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.335v Annotate
To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for
during all the tyme arlate the sayd Richard Hill John Hallot and Company
were Owners and Proprieters of the sayd shipp the Agreement whereof the
sayd Giles Lawrence who was by the sayd owners appoynted to mann
and command her. the voyage in question was Master the premisses he [knoweth]
being himselfe a part owner of the tyme arlate and having within
that tyme or before her being left [?stene] the sayd Captain Lawrence in
possession of her in the name of the foresayd owners. And otherwise 
cannot depose  

To the second third and fourth Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that in the moneths of may June July August September October and
November 1651 he this deponent was resideng att Naples and was the
factor Agent and Correspondent of the sayd Mr Hill Mr Hallet and Companie
and that within the sayd tyme the arlate George Farrington came to
naples and there before a notary there living did by contract
and agree with this deponent that the sayd George Farrington
his Agents would deliver for the use of this deponent or his Assigne unto or upon such shipp or shipps as he this
deponent should send to receyve the same 1100 salmes of oyles of the 
measure of Galipoly att a place called Petras, being in Morea, att
before or after the end of January 1652 stile of naples, and saith that
the sayd notary drew upp the foresaid Contract in writing in the presence of
him this deponent and the sayd George Farrington, and that a copye
thereof authentatied was delivered to this deponent by the notary which
drew the sayd Contract up, and detracted the sayd Copy out of his Protocoll
which authentick Copy this deponent sent from Naples over to the Citty
to the forsayd Mr Hill Hallet and Company who have as he believeth exhibited
the same to this Court, to which copye in case it be so exhibited this
deponent for the certainty of the tyme, and other Circumstances
refereth himselfe. And further cannot depose saving that he the
sayd Farrington hath severall tymes sithence acknowledged and [?confessed]
the forsayd contract and saving that the sayd shipp Agreement and Companie
in her were att Naples in December 1651 or about that tyme

To the fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that 
in or about the moneth of december 1651 he ordered the arlate Giles
Lawrence to sayle his said shipp Agreement to lade and take in
oyles in pursuence of the sayd Contract att Petras for the accompt of the forsayd owners and by the way
touch att Zant and there to stay 24 houres to receyve direction of
sayd George Farrington touching the sayd oyles, And further saieth
that he this deponent did furnish the sayd Captain Lawrence 
for the sayd Oyles with 17000 pieces of 8/8 or thereabout
which moneyes were laden, aboard the
sayd shipp Agreement att Naples and Messina for accompt of the [???] and were of the value of £4200 sterling att 5 shillings per dollar and saith that the sayd shipp Agreement
sett sayle therewith from Naples and safely arrived therewith att Zant
in our about the moneth of January 1652 new stile as he hath
Credibly heard and verily believeth. And otherwise cannot depose

To the 7 8 9 10 11 and 12th articles of the allegation, This deponent hath
Credibly heard that the sayd Farrington being not able to make good the
Contract did agree with the sayd Lawrence to take in the [sayd?] oyles to
Corona undertaking to secure shipp mariners and lading to and 
betwixt Zant and Crona and back againe to Zant and that a 
quantity of oyles were receyved into the sayd shipp att Crona and
payd for out of the same moneyes for Accompt of the [?plaintiff]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.336r Annotate
that the sayd shipp and oyles in her passage to Zante being mett with by
some Turkish piratts were blowne up and lost in fighte and the sayd Lawrance and
his Company made slaves in Tripoly. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the thirteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp the Agreement was of the burthen of two undred tonnes and
had 18 peices of Ordinance and was with her tackle furniture Apparell
and provisions of the value of 2200 li sterling when she was att Naples
about December 1651. and saith the oyles aboard her when she was lost in case they were
of the goodnes and quality contracted for as aforesayd, were of the
Cleare value of 84 dollars and ½ per tonne or thereabouts, and in case
they had come safely to this Port of London would have teilded the
summe of .40. li per tonne or thereabouts. And otherwise cannot depose

To the fourteenth article of the sayd allegation he ssaith that the passage from
Zant to Petras is usually observed to be a safe passage, and that the passage
betwixt Zant and Corona is observed to be a dangerous passage
by reason of Pyratts, and saith that in probability in case the sayd oyles
had according to the sayd conttract made att Naples bene furnished att
Petras, the sayd shipp and goods had come safe to this Port of London.

To the fifteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that soone
after the arrivall of tHE arlate shipp the John Bonadventure and
her lading of Currants arlate att this port of London, the arlate
Samuell Chamlett did say and declare in the presence of this
deponent that the sayd Currants laden aboard the sayd shipp were all
of them (about tenn tonnes or thereabouts excepted which were as he
said for his owne accompt) for the sole and proper accompt of the
arlate George ffarngton, and that he the sayd ffarington did buy and procure
the same att Zant and places adiacent for his owne accompt and that himselfe the sayd
Chamlett had furnished the sayd ffarington with some moneyes
att Cambio Maritimo for and towards the buying of part of
his the sayd ffaringtons foresayd Currants. And further cannot
depose.

To the 17. article of the sayd allegation he referreth himselfe to ye Acts of
this Court and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 18. he saith the sayd John Gold was and is a subiect of this
Commonwealth and to ye Jusirsdiction of this Court.

To the last he saith his deposicons are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatorries

To the 1. negatively.

To the 2. and 3 he saith he had an Interest both in the sayd shipp and
oyles to say 1/8th part in the sayd shipp and 1/16th part in the sayd
oyles. and in case the plainfiffs prevayle in this Cause expecteth
a proportionable Advantage out of that which they shall recover
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth he saith he cannot depose otherwise then as aforesayd.

To the fifth and schedule annexed now shewne him he saith thta
he cannot depose otherwise then as aforesayd haveing not seene
the originall Agreement interrate, being not present att Zant when
the same was made. And further cannot depose

REpeated in Court)
beforethe Judges)

Roger Hatton [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.336v Annotate
The 13th day of December 1653

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the
sayd William Hassard

1

Henry Lawe of Saint Katherines London mariner aged
50 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.337r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2).

William de Smitt of Ostend mariner aged 33.
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he this deponent
being att Dunkerke in September last past then and there saw the sayd
shipp the Hopewell now in question, and understood that she was a prize
shipp taken from the ffrench, and that the sayd William Hassard had
bought her of one Lucas da Croep, but whether the sayd shipp were
there condemned or elsewhere in fflanders or by authority of the King
of Spaine or not hee knoweth not neyther doth he know that the
sayd William Hassard payd 700 gilders for her to the sayd Lucas Croep

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about the
tyme aforesayd att Dunkerke he saw the arlate Lucas Croep discharge
the waiter that attended aboard the sayd shipp and deliver quiet and
actuall possession of her to the sayd William Hassard who accepted and
tooke the same and entred upon the sayd shipp or bessell by vertue of
the foresayd delivery as Master and Owner of her. And saith of the
certayne knowledge and sight of this deponent the sayd William Hassard
being possest of the sayd shipp as aforesayd did att his owne Charges
equiipp furnish and fitt out the sayd shipp to sea upon a voyage
from Dunkerke to this port of London, and buy for and fitt to and
upoon the sayd shipp a new mainmast and severall ropes and tackles
and caused the sayles of the sayd shipp to be mended and therein expended
a good summe of moneyes the value whereof he knoweth not, part
whereof he there borrowed of this deponent and hath since repayd
the same. And saith the sayd shipp was after her such fitting to sea
laden with severall goods which were first [?XXXX] to have bene laden
aboard the Saint Peter pf Ostend, wherof this deponent is Master, which goods
were brought in the sayd shipp Hopewell from Dunkerke to this port of
London and here discharged of the sight of this deponent, who [?XXXX]
[?say]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.337v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 14th day of December 1653.

Richard Hall John Hallett et cetera.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Smith dt.

3)

Thomas Base of Saxmunden in the County of
Suffolke Mariner late one of the Company of the
shipp the Agreement aged 28 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.338v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 14th day of December 1653.

William Moor against one two and thirtyeth)
part of the Sarah Bonadventure of which)
Andrew Wardlee is Master and her tackle)
and furniture belonging to himselfe)
and against Andrew Wardlee and others
comeing in for their Interest Suckley)
Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe
of the sayd William Moore

1)

James Wallace of Wapping in the
County of Middlesex Scrivener aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet./.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.339r Annotate
To the first Article of the sayd  allegation This deponent saith That in
the yeares 1650 and 1651 and monethes therein respectively concurring
the arlate Samiel Hawkes was master of the sayd shipp the Sarah
Bonadventure abd as master had possession of her of the knowledge and
sight of this deponent. And saith he hath Credibly heard and verily
beleiveth that he the sayd Samuel Hawkes the tyme aforesayd was likewise
partowner of one 32th. part of the sayd shipp and one 32th part of her
tackle apparrell and furniture, and for and as such the sayd Samuel
Hawkes was generally observed accounted and taken. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that on or about
the 28th day of July 1651. the arlate Samuel Hawkes did within
the Jurisdiction of this Court sell unto the sayd William Moore the sayd one
32th part of the 

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.339v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

Godfrey Wildbore of Colledge Hill London Scrivener
aged 16. yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.340r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 17th day of December 1653.

The Clayme of Peter Hubrecht and Hendrick)
[?Sutfeild] of Hamburgh for the shipp the Peter)
of Hamburgh of which Cornelius Yarrickson)
is master and the goods in the same being seacoles
and woolls lately seized by William Dunstan a)
[?private] man of warr and brought to Rye)
Suckley Smith)

Examined upon an allegation given in and
admitted on the behalfe
of the sayd Peter Hubrecht et cetera

Rp.

ffobbs ffobbes of Amsterdam Marriner
steersman of the sayd shipp the Peter aged
25 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith and deposetj
That the arlate Peter Hubrecht and Hendrick [?Sutfeild] were and are the
Owners and lawfull Proprietors of the sayd shipp the Peter and her tackle
apparrell and furniture. and saith that for theise .7. monethes now past that as
to say ever since the moneth of June of this present yeare 1653. they the
sayd Owners both Inhabitants of Hamburgh have bene in the quiet and
peaceable possession of the sayd shipp the Peter her tackle and furniture and
saith the foresayd Owners did att Hamburgh fitt furnish repaire and sett
forth the same upon her now present voyage which was begunn from the
sayd Port of Hamburgh in August last past and they did appoynt the arlate
Cornelius Yarrickson master of her upon her now voyage to Canne in Normandie
to returne from thence back again to Hamburgh to them the sayd Owners
by their order and appoyntment, and saith that for all the sayd space [?the ?XXX]
[?to]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.340v Annotate
says Owners have had the sole dispose of the sayd shipp as lawfull Owners
of her and so accounted all which he knoweth being att Hamburgh in
the sayd moneth of June last past when they became so possest of her, and
being hired att Hamburgh in August last to sayle in and upon her this
present voyage, and seeing the sayd shipp so sett out by the sayd Owners att
Hamburgh as aforesayd being Steersman of her and privy to and knowing
of the sayd voyage and designe And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd Hendrick Salfeild and
Peter Gabrecht did in the month of August .1653 last past lade aboard
the sayd shipp the goods now seized in her att the Port of Hamburgh [?that ?is]
to say 27 or 28 sackes of baggs of wooll, which this deponent sawe in the
house and possession of the sayd Peter Habrecht att Hamburgh before
the lading thereof, and eleven lasts of stone Coles to be transported
in the sayd vessell to Cane aforesayd, and there to be delivered to the
factor of the sayd producent by name Augustine Baden hoope who was and
is accounted the sayd producents Agent att Cane, and saith he saw the
sayd Coales before the same were laden in the possession of the producents
a shoare, and saith that the sayd producents were then accounted the Owners
of the sayd wooll and Coles, and commetted [CHECK SPELLING] the same to the care of the sayd
Yarrickson, who was att the tyme of the sayd seizure in full and
quiet possession thereof to the use and for and on the behalfe of them the
sayd Owners, and this deponent for his part never heard that any other
person had or hath any manner of Interest in the sayd goods or any of
them but the sayd producents onely. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd vessell
or shipp in her Course from Hamburgh to Cane was mett withall and
taken about nyne weekes last and on or about the 7th day of
October 1653. by Captaine Dunstan in a private man of warr, and
the sayd shipp being so seized the sayd Yarrickson being commannded
so to doe went aboard the sayd private man of warr and this deponent
saw him take with him two sea breifes under the saele of Hamburgh
and one bill of lading and some other papers, and the sayd Yarrickson
being come aboard the sayd man of warr delivered the same to the sayd
Dunstan and saith the sayd Certificatts or Seabreifes were sealed
really with the seale of the sayd Citty of Hamburgh and together with
the sayd bill of ladieng and other papers came really or were
really brought from the sayd Citty of Hamburgh and from noe other
place and the sayd Seabreifes and bills of lading were and are
reall and true and not fraudulent. which he knoweth for the reasons
aforesayd. And doth not know but the sayd other papers were likewise
reall and without fraud and covin. And otherwise cannot depose
ffobbe [MARKE] ffobbes. his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]

[?sea] him to the Interrogatories
fol, [?XXX]
----
The 19th day of december .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Peter de Cock of Gant and)
Baldwin Matthewes English man for seven)
hundred and fifty peices of eight of the)
marke underwritten lately seized in the)
shipp the Saint John Baptist of which John)
de Vos is Master by some of the shipps of)
this Commonwealth Suckley Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers

1.us

Juan Baptista de La Mott of Cadiz in Spaine
merchant aged 24 yeares or thereabouts
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.341r Annotate
To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that on or aboutthe
19th day of the month of Aprill 1653 the arlate Peter de Cock of
Gant and Baldwyn Matthews Englishman did by their factor ffrancisco
de la Sierpe lade for their owne accompt and adventure on board the sayd
shipp the Saint John Baptist John de Vos master, then lying in the bay of
Cadiz the sayd seven hundred and fifty peices of eight coyne of Peru
in one bagg marked as in the margent to be transported in the sayd shipp

'PC' [MARKE, LH MARGIN]

to Dunkirke or Ostend in fflanders and there to be delivered to the factors
or Assignes of them the sayd Peter de Cock and Baldwin Matthewes for
their use and benefitt And noe other person whatsoever then had or
att present hath any share tithe or Interest therein, the premisses he knoweth
to be true for that the sayd moneyes were and are the proceed of the producents
owne goods, and this deponent saw the same delivered to the Barker att
Cadiz who carryed the same aboard the sayd shipp who att his returne brought
a note of receipt for the same according to which the bills of lading for
the same were firmed and made in manner hereafter sett forth. And
otherwise cannot depose saving that he this deponent as the Companion of the
sayd ffrancisco de La Sierpe in his factorie did tell and Count the sayd
moneyes and bagges and marked the same.

To the second article of the sayd allegation he this deponent saith That the sayd Peter de
Cock was and is an Inhabitant of Gant in fflanders and a subiect of the
King of Spaine betweene whom and this Commonwealth there was and is Peace
and amity, and the sayd Baldwin Mathewes was and is an Englishman and a
subiect of the Commonwealth of England and so accounted and well affected
to the Government thereof as hee beleiveth, and is so accounted. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp in her
Course to Dunkerke was mett withall surprized and taken by some of the
shipps of this Commonwealth and the sayd moneyes were then on board her
att the tyme of seizure as this deponent hath credibly heard and verrely beleiveth
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that there were three
bills of lading of one tenor made for the receipt and delivery of the sayd
sylver and saith the schedule for the same remaining in the Registry
of this Court which this deponent lately saw and perused in the possession
of Mr Dorislanes was and is one of the sayd Originall bills of lading
and the same was in this deponents sight and presence subscribed with
the proper handwriting of the sayd John de Vos the Master of the sayd shipp
and the Contents thereof were and are true and so had made and done
as therein is conteyned really and without fraud or deceit before the
departure of the sayd shipp from Cadiz aforesayd and was filled upp with this deponents owne hand writing And otherwise he saith
hee cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. negatively.

To the 2. hee saith he knoweth the foresayd Claymers and so hath done for
three yeares and upwards and ffrancisco de La Sierpe from a Child
and him this Rendent often saw both a shoare and a shipboard att Cadiz in
Company of this Rendent and the sayd John de Vos whilest the sayd shipp John Baptist
did remayne there this her last voyage. and otherwise negatively.

To the 3d he saith he was present and saw the sayd ffrancise de la Sierpe
deliver the sayd moneyes to the Barkier as aforesayd and otherwise negatively.

To the .4. Interrogatory he saith the sayd Peter de Cock is a fflandrian living in Gant
and so hath lived many yeares, and the sayd Baldwin Mathewes is an Englishman and
hath lived in London many yeares and ffransisco de la Sierpe a fflandrian
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.341v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the .11. 12. 13. and 14th he saith that the sayd ffrancisco de La Sierpe hath
for theis three yeares and upwards bene the producents factor and hath
yearely receyved from them severall quantities of goods of good value from
Ostend, and hath generall Order to returne the proceeed thereof in
Sylver for all convenient shipping this deponent the Companion of the
sayd de la Sierpe being privy to his proceedings, letters of advise and
other matters touching his sayd factory. and particularly saith that the
last yeare 1652 severall parcells of lace, linnen Cloath and yarne of
the value of 3000. pieces of eight or thereabouts, came to the hands of the sayd
factor for accompt of the producents some in the shipp of Cordes [?Keysar]
some in the sayd shipp John Evangelist John de Vos Master some in other
shipps whose names he remembreth not, all from the Port of Ostend And
further cannot depose.

To the fifteenth he saith he was borne att Lisle and dwelleth in
Cadiz and otherwise negatively.

To the sixteenth Interrogatory he saith that the sayd moneyes were in the
yeare 1652. procured by the sayd ffrancisco de la Sierpe att severall
tymes of and from severall persons whose names he remembreth not
to whom he sold as the marketts and occasions happened the
goods of the producents and putt the same to their accompt according
to their respective Interests, to say 2/3 parts threeof to the sayd Peter
de Cock and 1/3 part to the sayd Baldwin Matthewes all which this Rendent well knoweth being the sayd ffrancisco de La Sierpes Companion in his
factories as a foresayd. And otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

and further that unlicensed sylver of [?Spaine]
in the Ports of Spaine before transportation is confiscable to the King
of Spaines use, but that the Owners are usually admitted to compound for
it And in case it be not so seized, It is not confiscateble by but is free
to the Owners in ffalnders or elsewhere as any other merchandize And
somuch is generally knowne And otherwise cannot depose

Joan [?Bauttista] de la [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.342r Annotate
The [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Hendrick Sutfeild and)
Peter Hubrecht et cetera)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Cornelius Yarrickson of hamburgh mariner Master
of the sayd shipp the Peter aged 38 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate hendrick
Sutfeild and Peter Hubrecht having bought the sayd shipp the Saint Peter
att Hamburgh about eight dayes before whitsondtide last past have
ever since being in the whole about 7 monethes had the possession of the
said vesssell her tackle and furniture without any molestation or pretended
right of any other thereto, and they did att their owne Costs and charges
of the certayne knowledge of this deponent being master of her equipp
and fitt her out to sea uppon a voyage under the conduct
of this deponent whom they appoynted Master, from Hamburgh to Caen
in ffrance and from thence to Burdeaux, and from Burdeaux back againe
to Hamburgh, but afterwards this deponent by reason of contrarie
winds being forced to lye and abide in the Elve eight weekes longer
than he expected, the foresayd Hendrick Sutfeild and Peter Hubrecht
gave this deponent Order to sayle the sayd shipp the voyage whereon
she now is that is to say from Hamburgh to Caen aforesayd, and from
thence directly home againe to Hamburgh; And saith the sayd
Sutfeild and Hubrecht were and are the true and lawfull Owners of the
sayd shipp having bought the same of one Hobbe ffulkers att Hamburgh
as aforesayd, and for such for and during all the tyme aforesayd the sayd
Owners have bene and are commonly accounted and observed And noe other
person had or hath any part or Interest therein. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd hendricvk
Sutfeild and Peter Hubrecht did in or about the moneth of August 1653.
cause to be had laden aboard the sayd shipp att Hamburgh for their accompt
the goods now seized in her which are 28. sackes or baggs of wooll great
and small and eleven lasts of Stone Coales to be in the sayd shipp
or vessell transported from Hamburgh to Caen and there to be delivered
to their factor named in a bill of lading for the said producents and same Augustine Baden Roope att [?Caen]
which goods he this deponent saw in the quiet possession of the sayd
Owners before the lading thereof, that is to say the sayd wooll in
the howse or warehowse of the sayd Peter Hubrecht att Hamburgh, and
the sayd Coales in the Cole howse or warehouse of Harman Geerts
att Hamburgh for the use and accompt of the sayd Owners, who are the
true lawfull and sole repued Owmers of the sayd goods, and committed the
sa,e to the care of this deponent who was in the full and free possession
thereof as master of the sayd shipp on the behalfe and to and for the use
and behoufe of them the sayd Owners, besides who noe other person
had or hath any share right or interest therein, or any part thereof
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd vessell
in her Course from Hamburgh to Caen, was mett withall surprized and taken
on or about the seventh day of October 1653 last past by a private Man
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.342v Annotate
of warr whereof William dunstan was Commannder. And saith that
soone after the sayd seizure he this deponent being commannder of
the sayd private man of warr did there deliver the sayd Captaine
dunstan two sea breifes under the seale of the States and Citty of
Hamburgh and one bill of lading the contents whereof were
and are true. and allso four letters the contents whereof hee
knoweth not. all ehich Certificatts letters and bill of lading were
really brought in the sayd shipp from Hamburgh, and the sayd sea breifes
were really sealed with the seale of the sayd citty of Hamburgh, and
were and are true and reall and not false fraudulent or colourable
which he knoweth for that upon the issuing forth of the sayd
seabreifes he this deponent was present in the Stadt howse in
Hamburgh and then and there saw and heard the sayd producents
sworne before the Lords the States there to the effect of the contents
of the sayd Seabreifes, referring himselfe to the same, and was
himselfe then likewise sworne to the same effect so farr as according
to the Custome there belonged to this deponent to sweare And otherwise
he cannot depose.

See him to the Crosse Interrogatories
fol. [?pen.] [CHECK SPELLIMG]

[?XXXXXXXXX JXXXXXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 23.th day of december 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

Hill Hallet and Company against the)
Currants in the Bonadventure)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

5

John Story of Rochester in Kent Mariner late
one of the Company of the sayd shipp Agreement
aged 22 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first article he saith the arlate Giles Lawrence was captaine master
or Commander of the sayd shipp the voyage in quesion which was begun
from this port of London about June 1651. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation he saith that in the sayd yeare [?1651]
and particularly on October November and december of the same yeare
and before and after the arlate Roger Hatton was residing att Naples
and was the factor of the producents and for such was accounted and
taken. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation thi sdeponent saith that in
the moneth of December 1651 the sayd shipp and Captaine Lawerence and this
deponent were att Naples, when and where this deponent was given to
understand aswell by the sayd Roger Hatton as others that the sayd George
ffarrington had within some few monethes before bene there, and
that he had contracted with the sayd Mr Hatton att a rate agreed upon to
deliver to him  or his assignes aboard any shipp or shippes to be sent for
that purpose .1100 salmes of oyles of the measure of Galipoly att Petras
a place in the golfe of Lepanto for the use of the sayd Roger Hatton or
his Assignes. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
That in or about the month of January 1651, the sayd Giles Lawerence by
the Order of the sayd Mr Hatton did depart from Naples with intent to sayle to
Petras and there to take in the sayd oyles according to the foresayd contract
and that att Naples and Messina were putt aboard the sayd shipp to [?XXXX]
[?XX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.343v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 13th article of the sayd allegation he saith the sayd shipp when she was
lost was of the burthen of 220 tonnes or thereabouts and had 18 guns
 and was with her tackle and provisions and appurtenances worth the somme
of £2000 or thereabouts and the foresayd oyles were worth the first
penny neere upon 17000 dollars and would if they had come safe
to England have yeelded a farr greater price. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith that the sayd Passage from Corona to Zant is very
dangerous in regard of Pyratts which he knoweth for that it is much
frequented ad infested by Dearovers as well Turkes as Bandites
plying thereabouts, and siath in probability in case the sayd oyles had
bene furnished att Petras according to the Agreement made with
Mr Hatton they might have come safely to this Port of London whence
they were designed for the Accompt aforesayd, the passage from Corona
to Zant being a more safe passage. And otherwise cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.344r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he was in and belonged to the sayd shipp Agreement in question

To the .2. he saith he had aboard thes sayd shipp for his owne accompt a small
parcell of Currants videlicet about a butt and halfe, in weight about
15. C. and in value per C. att first penny 4 pieces and a quantity
of silke of 20 pound weight or thereabouts worth first penny 12 s
the pound. and some silke stockins and other things worth 15 s or
thereabouts. And otherwise negatively.

To the .3. he saith in case the plaintiffs prevaiyle he expects his wages due
to the value of 14 li 6 s. and some satisfaction for his losses and towards
his redemption in proportion to what the sayd plaintiffs shall recover
and otherwise cannot depose saving that his redemption and incident
charges cost him C li sterling.

To the 4th he saith the sayd shipp as aforesayd did safely arrive att Zant
but tooke not in her lading there for merchants accompt but the
sayd Captaine Lawrence and shipps Company for their owne accompt did
there take in severall small parcells of Currants and otherwise
cannot depose saving that the foresayd Currants came safe to Corona.

To the 5th Interrogatory and schedule annexed therein mentioned and nowe
shewne him hee saith that he did not see the sayd Agreement libellate nor
can give any further accompt of it than as aforesayd, saving he
beleiveth that the sayd schedule is neither the originall Agreement
nor a Counterparty or true Copy thereof for that it lacketh one principall
Clause which the sayd ffollet and sayd Anthon[?XXyers] expressely sayd was in the originall
videlicet the sayd ffaringtons securing the sayd shipp mariners and
lading from Corona to Zant. and further cannot depose.

John Story [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The foresayd Daniel Straetman examined upon the
Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this Cause for the freedome
of his shipp by the advise of Mr ffranklin one of the Proctors of this
Court, and saith he is Owner of 1/4 part of the sayd shipp, and 1/4 of four
Chests and one pipe of sugars and 1/2 part of 32 tonns ore [?Barrells] of Tobacco
and of ten small caskes or barrells of Citron suchetts and of 2 small
barrells of dryed Citron. and of 3 small sackes of Cotton wooll. [#] And
otherwise he cannot depose.

[#] [ADD TEXT FROM LEFT MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES TO MAIN BODY OF TEXT]

To the second Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp began her last outwards
voyage in the month of June last past from the Port of Hamburgh
and her lading was pipestaves and two packs of peice goods and
saith for the sayd goods being for merchants accompts he had one bill
of lading which went along with them, which goods were the proper
goods of Duert Nunez da Costa and Company, [?rendring] for reason
of his knowledge that the sayd Nunez da Costa did freight the sayd shipp
for accompt of himselfe and Company referring himselfe to his [?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.344v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the third Interrogatory he saith the foresayd merchants goods were delivered to
Antonio Lopez Massell and Mathias de Gamon att Madera, where this
Rendent sold his owne goods aforesayd to severall persons there dwelling
whose names he remembreth not. And further saith that his sayd shipp began
her sayd voyage from Hamburgh as aforesayd sayled directly to Madera and there
discharged all her lading as aforesayd and from Madera sayled to [?XXX
with stones for ballast [SEE LH MARGIN] And further cannot depose saving that the sayd
shipp being now upon her voyage from Lisboa to Hamburgh was seized and
brought into dover where she now is.

[ADD TEXT FROM 90 DEGREES IN LH MARGIN]

To the fourth Interrogatry he saith he was att Lisboa one voyage and noe [?other]
before this videlicet in the yeare 1638 being then a common Mariner in the service
of Hamburghers aboard a shipp called the Peter Jacob Radling master and
saith he was this voyage freighted to goe from Hamburgh to Madera and to Lisboa and
thence to Hamburgh by the sayd Duart Nunez de Costa, referring himselfe to his sayd Charter
partye. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth Interrogatory he saith the present lading of his sayd shipp is [CHECK] w00 [?maXXX]
of salt and 30 Chests f sugar laden by Jacinto Camedo. 20 Chests of
sugar laden by ffrancisco ffernandez farna. 4 Chests of sugar by
Stephen Lowis da Costa. and .6. chests more by the same. 9 chests of sugar
by Manuel Rodrigues da Costa. 10 pipes sugar by ffrancisco Rodrigues
11 Chests sugar by Antonio Correa Bra[?vo]. one chest of Tobacco by the same
7 chests sugar by Manuel Rodrigues Isdro. 3 chests sugar by ffrancisco
Rodrigues Villa REal and Gonsalo Martins. 2 Chests sugar by Henry
da faria. 3 Chests sugar by Paulu vom Gisenrode. 4 chests sugar by
Antonio da Miranda. 4 chests and 3 halfe chests sugar by Manuell
Martin Madina. 11 chests sugar by Marcus da sylva. 3 chests sugar by
Guiars dasiquiera. 5 chests sugar by Johan Gonsal[?es] Britto. and [?XX]
chests more by the same. 2 chests sugar by Jaquez Legan. 2 chests sugar
by Manuel da Costa. 5 chests sugar by the same. 3 chests sugar by [?XX]
ffrances da brantes, 6 chests sugar by Paulus da silva. 3 chests sugar
by Andreas Soares Sarina. &amp; 8 chests more by the same. and this deponent
did himselfe lade his owne goods above mentioned for himselfe and [?XXX]
and John Gold and Gerard Boremaster did lade one chests of Tobacco
and his shipps folkes did themselves and for their accompt lade severall
parcells of sugar and other goods aboard for their owne accompt
And saith there was not laden any sylver aboard the sayd shipp any sylver
or moneyes whatsoever, nor was or is there any aboard the sayd shipp and
this deponent had in his purse 4 peeces of 8/8 and noe more. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 6. Inmnterrogatory he saith he knoweth Arnolt [?Belthens] interrate to whom [?XX]
chests of sugar are consigned, but what goods he had or hath aboardfor
his owne reckoning  knoweth not, and hath knowne him 20 yeares. and [?hath]
knowne Phillip Ver Porten ten yeares to whom the foresayd sugars last mentioned
are likewise consigned

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.345r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 23th day of december .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Claime of the said hubrecht)
and others.)

The sayd Cornelius Yarrickson to the Crosse Interrogatories.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.346r Annotate
The same day

The foresayd Hobbe Hobbes to the foresayd Interrogatories

To the  .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this casue by the meanes of Mr
de Haze of Dover, and first saw the sayd shipp att Amsterdam about two
yeares agoe in the possession of Obbe ffolkers an Inhabitant
of Amsterdam being by birth an Easterling, and he he sayd ffolkers had
likewise possession of the sayd shipp in the month of Aprill last past. And
further himselfe having noe interest therein nor knowing where she was
built, otherwise than negatively cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith he hath noe habitation being a bachilor and following
sea imployment, but was borne att, and belongeth to Amsterdam, as to his 
parentage and saith he is not a subiect of any One particular Prince
or State, but of every Prince and State whether his seafaring
ymployment carry him, and saith he hath bene a seaman for ten yeares
last past in which tyme he hath many tymes bene in Holland Zealand
England the Eastland and other parts, but never made any residence
in any of them nor can declare how long or how often he hath bene
upon severall occasions in them. And otherwise cannot depose./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.346v Annotate
The 23rd day of December 1653

Jasarmann touching the) [CHECK SPELLING]
shipp Brewer, Claus van)
Reton)

Richard ffaldoe of London ffishmonger lately appointed
by Captaine James Brock to attend aboard the shipp the
Brewer whereof Claus van Raton was master aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull
William Clarke and John Godolphin Doctors of Law two
of the Judges of the high Court of Admiraltie saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

Rowe dt.

That upon the eleventh day of this Instant December 1653 hee this
dponent being aboard the sayd shipp the Brewer whereof the sayd Claus
Van Reton was master to lokke [CHECK SPELLING]  to the sayd shipp and goods aboard her for the
use of this Commonwealth according to a warrant to this deponent directed
by the sayd Captaine Brock and by the order of the Comissioners for Prize
goods in that behalfe, Aaron van Reton the sonne of the sayd Claus
van Reton in the forenoone of the same day came aboard the sayd shipp
from the shoare having some bookes in his hands and amongst themm
A booke called the Waggoner, and also a platforme for the sea for
the drawing of seacharts, and was very chearfull and merry and
amongst other discourses sayd in a reioycing manner, Now we shall
be freed, and sett att Liberty and be gon with our shipp or to that effect
And thereupon this deponent falling into discourse with him the sayd
Aaron van Reton did amongest other things aske or demannd of him
where he had the sayd bookes and platfomre, and he thereto replyed
I had them in my fathers howse in Amsterdam; And saith that
upon occasion of the speaking the sayd words and information thereunto
given bby this deponent the Vhest of the sayd Claes van Roton standing
in the great cabin of the sayd shipp where the sayd Aaron doth contantly
lodge was searched and the two bookes abiding in the Registry of this Court and now shewed
to him this Examinat were  in the presence and of the sight of this deponent
found in the said Chest. And further that he hath severall tymes
heard one Cornelius the Carpenter of and belonging to the sayd shipp saying
he bought his knife which he useth att Meales and likewise a booke which
he carryed about with him att Amsterdam and that his intent was to returne
to Amsterdam or to the like effect. And further deposeth not.

Richard ffaldeo [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.347r Annotate
The 16th day of November 1653.

Captaine Phillipps against the shipp)
the Hope Thomas Andreison Master.)

Examined upon the foresayd allegation.

2

Captaine Jan Peterson Gryp of Hamburgh
Mariner aged 44 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth.

That hee this deponent hath well knowne the allegat shipp the
Hope Thomas Andreison Master for theis 16 or 17 yeares last past
or therabouts, for and during all which tyme he the sayd Thomas
Andreison hath bene and still is master thereof, and the sayd shipp
for and during all the sayd tyme hath and still doth belong to
the Port of Hamburgh, and Hamburghers there dwelling,
whose names are Harman Berens, Abraham Vanderweedon
the heyres of Gerard van Emren, the heyres of Albert Blocke
the heyres of Harry Claeson, the heires of Hans Young, one
Hans Hopp and the foresayd Thomas Andreison, And saith that during
that tyme or any part thereof noe subiect of the King of ffrance or of the
States of the United Provinces had or hath any interest or share therein
but the forenamed persons subiects of the free State of Hamburgh
have had the sole possession and mannagement thereof from tyme
to tyme for and during the sayd tyme of this deponents knowledge
sight and certaine observation, and they have bene reputed the like
Owners thereof with the tackle and furniture thereto belonging
And saith that the sayd shipp about the beginning of this last summer
came as this deponent hath heard from Hamburgh laden with peice goods, and safely arrived
therewith att Roane of this deponents sight; and this deponent further
saith that the sayd Thomas Andreison did upon his arrivall att Roane
and delivery of his outward bound goods there acquaint him this
Examinat that he was to returne with his sayd shipp to Hamburgh
directly with a shipps lading of goods consigned thither for
merchants there dwelling; And this deponent verily beleeveth that
the sayd shipp the Hope was and is accordingly bound directly
to Hamburgh and to noe other port or place whatsoever there to
make a full discharge of her present lading for the accompt of
Hamburghers. And further or otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes.

To the 1 he saith he hath 2 tonnes of vinegar aboard the sayd shipp
the Hope for his owne Account which he hopes will be restored and
otherwise negatively.

To the 2. negatively.

To the 3. he saith he was not present nor saw the firming of the bills of
lading interrate.

To the .4. he saith the lading of the outward voyage were severall sorts
of peice goods, and this Rendent hath heard that the heyres of
Peter and Joos Overbeck of Hamburgh did lade a good quantity of
the sayd goods and further he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.347v Annotate
To the .5. he saith he hath not deposed to the bills of lading.

To the .6. he saith he is an Hamburgher borne and hath there lived
all his tyme and his howse is in the Kearweden
and saith his knowledge of the merchants mentioned in the bills of
lading to be are the Reckening and risko of the goods therein respectively
named is as followeth and not otherwise, he this deponent having not
bene att home att his howse attt Hamburgh videlicet
francis Wallich he knoweth not. Albert Wullfe he saith hath lived in Hamburg
4 yeares and is knowne to this Rendent, and is toward the best of his age
Marke Martins he knoweth not, Michael Heash he knoweth a man of middle
age a dweller in Hamburgh .10 yeares: Abraham Anchelman John [?XXX]
Jacob and ffrancis Williams . Jan Chantenell, Jurian Schoomaker and [?XX]
Van fflit he hath knowne respectively Inhabitants of Hamburgh ten yeares
and upwards. and when this Rendent was last att Hamburgh the sayd
Schoman or Schoonmaker dwelt in the Keyrweder of middle age and
the sayd Van fflitt when this Rendent was last att Hamburgh dwelt neare
the New Crane inclining to old age but what
color of his hayre or complexion or signe of his house or haire complexions
signes or howses of the other persons he knoweth not. And saith that
Berent Berens .Peter Bolein, Paul femond and Company of [?Nurenberg]
he knoweth not. but saith he hath knowne Marcus Luce of [?Hams]
4 or 5 yeares a middle aged man. and Joachim Mester of Hamburgh
20 yeares, a middle aged man and brownish haire and lived in the
Keareweder when this Rendent was last att Hamburgh

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.348r Annotate
The seaventeenth day of November 1653

On the behalfe of the Keepers of the)
Liberty of England by authority of)
Parliament against the shipp the)
Leaping hart whereof John Menke)
is master lately seized by some of the)
shipps of this Commonwealth, and the goods)
in the same, and whatsoever person or
persons interested therein Budd)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe
of the sayd Keepers of the Liberty of England
by Authority of Parliament.

Rp.

John Menke of Hamburgh Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Leaping Hart
aged two and forty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie This deponent saith he was in the sayd shipp
the Leaping Hart when she was seized by the shipps of this Commonwealth
and was master of her and so had bene for sixe or seven monethes
before, and was borne att a small village named Ritsbattle neere to
Hamburgh and under the Jurisdiction of the free State of Hamburgh
and saith that for theis twelve yeares now last past he hath lived and
kept his howse wife and family in the sayd Citty of Hamburgh
where his wife and howse and family now are, and he came first
there to dwell and inhabite with his wife for about .12 yeares since
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatorye This deponent saith that the sayd shipp the Leaping
hart was att the tyme of her being seized bound for the sayd port
and Citty of Hamburgh from which sayd port she began her
outward voyage in or about the moneth of may or June last past of
this present yeare now current and her sayd voyage was not upon
Accompt of her Owners, but she was freighted by theis Merchants of Hamburgh whose
names are Daniel Brandt and Jerome Sny[?eter] for account of Adrian Goldsmith but there was
not as he saith any Charter partie of affringement, or any bills
of lading made for the goods by them the sayd merchants laden
aboard her the sayd shippe. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatory this deponent saith that there were laden aboard
the sayd shipp the said outward voyage twenty thousand pipestaves, all
which were laden aboard the sayd shipp by the foresayd Daniel
Brandt and Jerome Sny[?eter] but for the Accompt as he beleiveth of
Mr Adrian Goldsmith. and one fatt of skins for accompt of the
sayd Jerome Sny[?ter]. and some Cheese and butter for the accompt
of this deponent. and saith the sayd pipestaves were consigned and
delivered to Andreas Marsch or [?Marsa] and Carlos van dam att Malaga
and the sayd fatt of ffells or skins was consigned to the said Marsch
or [?Massa] att Malaga but was not delivered to him but was taken
and plundered out of the sayd shipp in her passage by some ffrench
Capers. and the sayd shipp having taken in her sayd lading att
Hamburgh sayled directly to Malaga, and in her course from
thence to Hamburgh back againe was seized and brought
into the Port of Plymouth where she now is, and hath not bene
att any other port or ports but Malaga and Plymouth since
she began her sayd outward voyage. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the fourth Interrogatory This deponent saith that the sayd shipp had
laine att Hamburgh before she began her sayd outward voyage
for
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.348v Annotate
for about six or 7 moneths videlicet the whole winter and spring
next preceding, and as this deponent hath credibly heard and
beleiveth she then next before came from the Canarie Islands,
and further cannot depose being not then master of or belonging
to the sayd shipp.

To the fifth Interrogatory This deponent saith that himselfe by name
John Menke is the present Master of the sayd shipp and was constituted
master thereof about 7 moneths since att Hamburgh by the present
Owners of the sayd shipp. and the master thereof next before him
was one Peter Bruyer a native of Hamburgh and Inhabitant there with
his sister in the house of his late father there, but he the said Bruyer was not
in the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure nor was belonging to
her, or hath
any part or interest in this shipp the Leaping hart, but this deponent
hath as he saith one eighth part therein which he bought about
7 monethes agoe att Hamburgh of and from the sayd Peter Bruyer
and his brother whose name he remembreth not, and this deponent
payd for the same to Bartal Yonkall of Hamburgh by the order and to and for the use of the sayd Bruyer and his sayd brother sixe
hundred and odd markes Luboekes. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the sixth Interrogatorye this deponent saith that the rest of the Owners
of the sayd shipp were and are all Hamburghers and there videlicet att Hamburgh now dwell
and have lived and inhabited for this 26 yeares last past and
indeed all their tymes respectively. and their names and inter[?ests]
therein were and are as followeth videlicet. Augustin Hendrickson
was and is owner of one eighth part of the sayd shipp the Loeping
Hart, Harman Hendrickson of one 16th part. Simon Cornelison
Prophet of one 16th part. and Bartall Yonkall was and is owner of
one halfe of the sayd shipp and Peter Wield and his brother whose
name att present he remembreth not were and are owners of
one eighth part of the sayd shipp. and saith that the sayd present
Owners bought their sayd respective parts and shares therein about
7 monethes now past att Hamburgh of and from the foresaid
Peter Bruyer and his brother and they and this deponent
payd for the whole shipp five thousand markes Lubeckes
that is to say each one his proportionable share according to
his respective interest. and this deponent receyved the respective
proportionable shares of the sayd moneyes of and from the sayd
Augustin, and Harman Hendrickson, and the sayd Simon Cornelison
Prophet and payd over the same together with his owne share
to the sayd Bartall Yonkell to and for the use of the sayd
Bruyer and his brother. and he hath credibly heard that the sayd
Peter Wyeld and his brother payd their shares to the sayd Yonkell
for the use of the sayd Bruyer and his brother, And this deponent
hath heard the sayd Yonkell say and the sayd Bruyer and
his brother confesse that he the sayd Yonkell hath really and
truely payd the sayd five thousand markes to them the sayd
Bruyer and his brother for the sayd shipp, and that they the
sayd Bruyer and his brother receyved the same accordingly, And
saith the sayd shipp hath belonged to the Port of Hamburgh [?to ?XXX]
Hamburghers there dwelling for theise four yeares last past of this deponents [?XXXX] and
was built att Enchuysen as he hath heard. And otherwise cannot depose
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.349r Annotate
To the seventh Interrogatory he saith that all the lading of the sayd shipp now
seized was receyved aboard att the sayd port of Malaga. And saith he
knoweth one Andrew Massa
or Marste,
and knoweth well Charles van damme interrate, and saith
he saw the sayd persons att Malaga and was often in their Companie
there and the sayd Massa or Marste was aboard the sayd shipp att Malaga
and the foresayd pipestaves were sent in the sayd shipp to them the sayd
[?Marstle] and van damme and were so consigned by Brandt and Snyeter
afore mentioned. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the eighth Interrogatorie This deponent saith he hath lived in Hamburgh
[?bac=helor] and maried man 27 yeares or therabouts, and hath had his wife and family there 12 yeares
or thereabouts. And saith Adrian Goldsmith interrate is by common
fame and repute an Hamburgher, but whether he hath his howse
and dwelling in Hamburgh or where he hath lived for theis ten
yeares last past this deponent for his part saith he knoweth not but hath heard that hee liveth in Antwerpe. And
saith that the foresayd pipestaves were all as he beleiveth for the
accompt of the sayd Adrian Goldsmith. And the merchants goods
nowe aboard the sayd shipp were and are for the Accompt of him the
sayd Adrian Goldsmith according to a bill of lading for the same
which is as he beleiveth in the Registry of this Court and hither sent by
the Captaine that made the seizure, whereto he referreth himself
and otherwise cannot depose.

To the ninth Interrogatory this deponent saith that there belong to the sayd shipp
the Leaping Hart 11. persons men and boyes, most of them Hamburghers
and all Easterlings one common mariner onely excepted
named Thomas, and saith he knoweth not what countryman the sayd
Thomas is, nor doth know that the sayd Thomas or any other of the
shipps Company did or doe belong to Holland or Zealand or
were or are subiects of the States of the united Provinces. And saith
the sayd shipps Company came all aboard the sayd shipp att Hamburgh.
and that there was not any one that went or came supra Cargo
or merchant in the sayd shipp. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the tenth Interrogatorye this deponent saith that he this deponent hath
aboard the sayd shipp the quantity of five pipes of malaga wines
and about .40. barrells of Raisins, all for his owne Accompt, And
his shipps Company have likewise some small quantityes of wyne
to the value of about three pipes, and likewise some small quantityes
of Raisins but how much in certaine he knoweth not, and saith for
the sayd goods of ths deponent and shippes Company there was not nor
is any bill of lading, and knoweth not that there were any other
goods aboard att the tyme of seizure, for which therewas noe bill
of lading. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Johan [?Wranick] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court
before the Judges
----
The 18th day of November .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Captaine Isaak Phillip against the Leopard)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3.

Arnold Beake of Botolph Lane London merchant
aged 45 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.349v Annotate
That he this deponent about the 13th day of May last past of this present moneth
receyved order from the allegat Daniel Thison in a letter brought
to this deponent by his precontest  Joris Johnson, to buy for him
the sayd Thison, or assist the sayd Joris Johnson in buying for him a shipp
here in England, and saith that not finding any convenient shipp
here att att this port of London he gave to the said Joris Johnson a letter
of Credit to Mr Michael de Haze of Dover to buy a shipp there
for the sayd Thison; and the sayd Michael de Haze did accordingly
assist the sayd Johnson in that behalfe, and they in the month of January last
or about that tyme did buy of and from Thomas Dawkes of Dover
for 365 li sterling the allegat shipp the Leopard formerly called the
Blackbusse, which had bene a prize shipp and sold by the Subcommissioner
of prize goods att Dover to the foresayd Dawkes as by a bill of
sale which this deponent hath seen did appeare. And the foresayd
Dawkes made a bill of sale of the sayd shipp to Joris Johnson in
consideration of 365 li sterling which moneyes the sayd Michael de Haze
did furnish and pay att Dover to the sayd Dawkes, and drew the same
upon this deponent by bills of exchange here att London together
with 330 li 10 s sterling more furnished there att Dover by the said Michael
de Haze for equipping and setting forth the sayd shipp, being in
the totall 695 li 10 s sterling which moneyes this deponent did really
pay and satisfy according to the bills of the sayd Michael de hare
drawne upon him in that behalfe. And moreover saith that the
foresayd Joris Johnson for the securing of this deponents moneyes
expended for the sayd shipp over and besides such effects as this deponent
had in his hands of the sayd Thison in flax and other grosse wares
to the value of 260 li. 17 s. 4 d. and not upwards, did make a bill of
sale of the sayd shipp to him this deponent. And saith this last bill of
sale notwithstanding being onelly for security of moneyes expended
for the sayd shipp in manner predeposed, the foresayd Daniel Thyson now
and is the sole owner of the sayd shipp now called the Leopard and formerly
the Blackbusse and her tackle and furniture and so accounted, and the
same was really and truly bought and payd for as aforesayd for his sole use
and Accompt. And saith the sayd Daniel Thyson by common repute
is an Inhabitant and Burgher of Ostend and a subiect of the King
of Spaine, and his letters and advises to this deponent being his
Correspondent beare date from Ostend. And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first Interrogatorie This Rendent saith that he hath interest in the
sayd shipp by vertue of the sayd bill of sale made to him of the same by
the sayd Joris Johnson to the value of 264 li. 12 s. 8 d. over and besides a surety [?XXX]
of wages andvictualls the certaine value whereof he knoweth not
but stands responsible for the same to the sayd Michael de Haze and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the .2. negatively.

To the .3. he saith he knoweth the interrate Daniel Thyson, and so hath done
for theis 20 yeares now past, and saith he is by report a Zealander borne
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.350r Annotate
and hath bene absent from Camphier where he formerly dwelt, and out
of the territories of the States of the United Provinces being banished
from thence for some delict in a busines of ensurance, for about 3 yeares
and this Rendent hath credibly heard that his wife and family are
all with him att Ostend. and otherwise he cannot depose

To the .4th. Interrogatorie he saith he cannot depose

To the .5. he saith he was not present att the buying of the sayd shipp. and
otherwise referring to his foregoeing depositons cannot depose, saving
that the sayd Thysons letter to this Rendent beares date from Ostend 15. May
1653 new stile. and this Rendents sayd order or letter of Credit to Michael de Haze
was written here in London about the latter end of May or beginning of
June last past

To the .6. he saith he knoweth Leonard Thyson of Camphier the brother of
the sayd Daniel. and beleiveth that he is not partner in trade with
the sayd Daniel his brother, and that he hath noe manner of Interest
att all in the shipp now in question And otherwise cannot depose.[#]

[## LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]

[##] saving that he the rather beleiveth the sayd brothers Daniel and Leonard
Thyson are not partners in trade, for that he this Rendent having held
and kept Correspondencyes with them both in the way of trade hath from
tyme to tyme seene and observed that they have kept their Accompts
Currant wholly distinct.

Arnold Beake [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

To the .7. he saith the sayd Daniel Thyson as this Rendent understans
by Correspondenceies lives in good repute att Ostend, and beleives he is
well able to buy such a shipp as the sayd shipp Leopard; but saith he
would not have forsaken Zealand in case he had not bene banished for
his foresayd delicet as this Rendent beleiveth And further cannot depose.

To the .8. he saith he cannot depose.

To the .9. he saith he this Rendent did pay severall summes  of money
for or by occasion of the sayd shipp according to bills drawne upon
him by the sayd Michael de Haze to severall  persons whose names
att present he calleth not to mynd, and so payd the same in this Citty
of London. and otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot
depose.

Arnold Beake [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court
before the Judges
----
The 19th day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of Peter and Paul Telement)
et cetera for the Lowisa and Hunter)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

4.

Savat de la Sagha of Rounay neere Bayon in
ffrance aged 25 yeares or thereabouts master
of the shallopp belonging to the sayd shipp the Lowiss
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

That the sayd respective shippes the Lowisa and the Hunter att
the tyme of the sayd seizure together with the oyles finnes and goods
therein seized did and att present doe belong to the sayd Peter and
Paul Telement, and Monsieur Bivot and others being the Greenland
Company of ffrance, and that the sayd shipps were sett out by the foresayd
Greenland Company at their owne charges and the same were to returne
with their oyle and whale finnes to Havre de Grace in ffrance for
the Accompt and Adventure of the sayd Greenland Companie in ffrance
And they have for seven or eight yeares of this deponents knowledge
who hath so long served them in the like voyages used the sayd trade
in sending shipps to Greenland to take whales to make oyle and returne
the same back againe to ffrance, and mant of the sayd shipps Company
[?XXXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.350v Annotate
respectively have severall yeares served them in the like imployment
And saith of his certayne knowledge the sayd shipp Lewise for
theis three yeares last past this deponent being one of her Company
and the sayd Hunter for 2 yeares now past of his knowledge
have in their returne from Greenland to ffrance made their
passage through the English Chanell, and saith that the sayd
shipp Lewisa was this present voyage by the order of the sayd Greenland
Companie to call att the Texell being a convenient place for
that purpose there to take in a Pilot to guide the sayyd shippe through
the Chanell to Havre de Grace, And saith as he hath credibly
heard the shipps of the sayd Greenland Company of ffrance have
in their course from Greenland touched in former yeares att the
Texall being an usuall and convenient way betwixt Greenland
and Havre de Grace, and this deponent hath seene a dutch
Pilott arrive in one of the shipps of the sayd Greenland Company
att Havre de Grace videlicet about 3 yeares now past and he did
then understand that the sayd dutch Pilot was taken in att the
Texall and hired for 40. livres. And further saith that the
sayd shipp Lewisa of his certayne knowledge and the Hunter as
her verily beleiveth were bound directly to Havre de Grace there
to make their full discharge for Accompt of the sayd Peter and
Paul Telement and Companie, and to noe other port or place
or to and for any other Accompt. And saith the sayd shipp the
Lewisa of his like knowledge was ot intended or designed to
goe into any port in Holland, but was onely to touch att the
Texall there to take in a Pilot as aforesayd, which he knoweth
being Master of the Lewisas shallop and privy to the sayd voyage
and designe, and he beleiveth the same of and touching the sayd
shipp the Hunter. And further referring himselfe to the Registry
of this Court he saith he cannot depose:

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.351r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 19th day of November 1653.

The Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament against a certaine shipp named the ffortune as is sayd)
of Stetin and the wheat and other goods)
taken and seized in her and against all et cetera)
Budd. Suckly)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of
the sayd Keepers et cetera and of the Commissioners for Prize goods

1

Richard Stapley of the parish of Saint Mary Maudlens
Southwark Barber Chyrurgeon and Corne Meter aged 56. yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith he cannot depose.

To the fourth fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that he this deponent together with severall others and in particular
his Contests Henry Walter and John Nutshaw were imployed
about the moneth of July last by the Commissioners for prize goods
to and for the unlading of certaine wheat out of the arlate shipp
the ffortune of Stetin lyeing neere Limehouse dock in the River
of Thames. And saith that the sayd wheat was then of the sight
and certaine knowledge of this deponent in a very perishing condition
and being very white musty and unsavoury and excessive hott And
that after the topp thereof was removed to about the depth of one
foot or thereabouts the remainder thereof was by excessive heat
so hard baked together that it could not be removed with shovells
and ordinary instruments for that purpose, but this deponent and
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.351v Annotate
the rest of his fellow Labourers in that worke were forced to breake
it up with Crowes of Iron and other ike instrument, and it rose
up matted and baked together in great large flakes, and the
heat thereof was so excessive and stench so noysome and stifling
that this deponent and his sayd Companions were forced to pull
off their Cloathes and worke naked, and saith notwithstanding
the stifling heat and stench of the sayd Corne was so great
that one of the sayd workmen gott his [?bame] and death therby
and others very ill and dangerous distempers, and this deponent
amongst the rest was so overprest and overcome with the noyso[?XX]
that though he were then an able and lusty person and used
to the mealing of Corne, and such like hard labour for theise
12 yeares last past yet could not hold out to the finishing of
the sayd worke, but was forced to retire himselfe to worke
upon the lighter in the aire, and continued ill att ease by the
distemper he then gott for many weekes after. And saith
that the sayd shipp had taken in wett att her ballast port holes
and the corne that lay neere to the sayd port holes and the mast of
the shipp ws rotten and so fowle and nuyson that it was not
for any use nor fitt for hogs. And saith by the knowledge this
deponent hath in that sort of Commodity and grayne having
bene a Corne Meter for 12 yeares as aforesayd, the sayd wheat
in case it had continued in the sayd shipp unremoved by the space
of 16 or 20 dayes longer would have become wholly perished
and unfitt for use and would have bene in some short tyme
more in danger to have taken fire through its owne heat
and thereby have consumed it selfe and endangered the shipp
and other shippes neere it. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the wighth and nynth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that good diligence was used of this deponents knowledge by the
foresaydd Commissioners, to recover the sayd wheat into as good a
plight as it was capable to be, And saith one Mr Vincent bought
a good part of it of the sayd Commissioners, And this deponent hath credibly
heard by severall Cornemasters that he gave more for it than
any man would and thatindeed he over bought it and is like to be
a great looser by it; And this deponent for his part saith that by
reason of the great plenty of good sound corne in England
att this tyme very little of the foresayd wheat will be for any
other use in England except for making of starch. as hee
beleiveth. And further cannot depose.

To the tenth article he saith It is  notorious that by reason of the
present plenty Corne is very Cheape in England, and good  sound
merchantable English wheat of the better sort is usually bought and sold
about London for 22 s the quarter. and good sound English
wheat of the ordinary sort for 20 s the quarter and under. And
the like sorte of wheat att other place in this Nation are he
hath heard and beleiveth bought and sold att easyer rates bye 4 d a quarter And
further cannot depose.

Richard staepelee [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.352r Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

John Nutshall of the parish of Saint Saviours Southwarke
Corne Porter aged 55 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first second and third Articles of the sayd allegation this deponent
saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the fourth fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation this
deponent saith and deposeth That he this deponent in or about the
moneth of July last past of this present yeare 1653. was imployed by
the Commissioners for prize goods with his precontest Richard Staples, one
Edward Sprigs and his contest Henry Walter and others for the
unlading of a certayne shipp lyeing over against Lyme house
dock in the River of Thames being the shipp arlate commonly called
the ffortune of Statin which was then laden with wheat. And
saith the sayd wheat was then in a very perishing condition and
some of it actually perished, and that after the removall of about
two foot in depth thereof It was very heavy white musty and hard baked together
so as it was forced to be loosened and broken with Crowes of
Iron and the like Instruments, and being loosened and broken up
did rise in great lumps and flakes as big as a mans body, and
was so excessive hott that one of the Labourers that wrought with
the Crow of Iron and happening to Chopp his Crow upon a Ring
of Iron which it seemes had laine in the sayd Corne his fingers
were singed in taking of the sayd ring from his Crow, and saith
that the dust heat and stench of the sayd wheat was so great
[?naysome] and stifling that the Labourers that wrought in the hold
of the shipp were forced and faine of this deponents sight to
worke naked, and one of them videlicet the foresayd Edward Spriggs
was so distempered thereby that he became sick and dyed of his
distemper then gott, and many others of the sayd Labourers
receyved much preiudice in their health thereby and were ill att
ease long after, and some were forced to leave the worke before
it was quite finished being overcome with stifling heat and this
deponent amongst the rest. And saith the sayd wheat had receyved
much hurt by water that came in att her port holes and elsewhere
and great quantityes of water were daily pumped out, and such
corne as lay neere the sayd port holes and in the bottom of the
hold next the mattes was quite perished and unfitt for any use
and indeed not fitt for hoggs, to the quanitty of about 12
quarters which was as he beleiveth throwne overboard. And this
deponent having bene a Corne porter for theis eight yeares now
past by the skill and experience he hath in wheat thereby knoweth
that
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.352v Annotate
that the sayd wheat in 3 weekes or a month longer if it had not
bene removed out of the sayd shipp would in probability have
bene utterly perished and in danger to take fire by its owne
heat and thereby have consumed itselfe and the foresayd shipp
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 8 and 9th articles he saith he knoweth not whether the wheat
in question were sold by the Candle or what that manner of sale
is, but saith he hath heard that Justice Vincent bought all
or most of the wheat of the ffortune and he hath heard he
hath overbought it and is like to be a greate looser by it
and incase he have payd att the rate of 19 li 10 s by the
store of quarters for the same as this deponent hath heard he
hath payd, corne being now so good and good cheape in
England he must of necessity by this deponents skill in corne
be a great looser thereby. And othewise cannot depose saving
that the sayd Commissioners used their best diligence to recover the
sayd wheat into as good and saleable a condition as it might
or could be brought into after so great dammage done to it by
the leakines of the sayd ship and heat thereof as aforesayd.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that of his
certayne knowledge good sound undamnifyed merchantable
wheat is commonly now sould in London for 20 s the quarter
and at other places in England as this deponent hath heard
and beleiveth the like sound wheat is commonly bought and sild
in open marketts att easyer rates by reason of the great plenty
of good corne in England att this present. And otherwise cannot
depose.

John Nutshawe [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the foresayd allegation.

3.

Henry Walter of the parish of Saint Olaves Southwarke
Corne Meter aged 42 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegation he saith he
cannot depose./

To the fourth fifth sixth and seventh articles of the sayd allegation This
deponent saith that in the month of July last past [?XX] the tyme he
otherwise remembreth not the lading of the sayd shipp the ffortune
of Stetin being for the greatest part wheat was in a very perishing condition, and very hott and
musty, and after the rymoveall of the topp thereof to the depth
of about a foot and a halfe, the sayd wheate was so hard caked
and crusted together that it could not be removed with shovells, but
this deponent and other &amp;#124;Labourers ymployed in the worke were forced
to loosen and breake upp with a Crow of Iron and the like
Instruments
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.353r Annotate
Instruments, and the heat thereof was soe excessive and the stench thereof is
noysome and stifeling that this deponent and the rest of his felloe
Labourers in the hold were forced to putt off their garments and worke
naked, and the one of the sayd Labourers by the sayd noysome heat and stench
videlicet Edward Spaiggs arlate grew distempered fell sick and dyed
of his sicknes and distemper then gott, and one Robert Brockett one
other of the Labourers gott by the same meanesa shrewd distemper
which hath continued upon him and made him weake listles and
unfitt for hard labor ever since, and severall others of the sayd
Labourers receyved much hhurt and preiudice in their health and some
were forced to leave the worke before it was finished. And saith
the sayd vessell was very leaky so as 2 men during the whole
tyme of her such unlading were imployed att the pumpe constantly
And the wheat neere the port holes and att the bottome next the matts
to the quantity five quarters att the least was all crusted black and
so noysome and wholly perished that it was nott fitt for any use
noe not for hoggs, nor any way worth the carrying away
but was as an uselesse thing throwne and cast over board: And
saith in case the sayd corne had not bene removed but had continued
in the sayd shipp by the space of 16. or 20 dayes longer the
same would in all probability have all of it bene rendred uselesse
and have utterly bene perished and in great danger to have
taken fire and consumed itselfe and the sayd shipp the heat
thereof was soe excessive, All which he knoweth having bene
for theis 6. yeares last past a Cornemeter and beinge Imployed
in the foresayd worke from the beginning to the end thereof by the Commissioners for prize goods
as were allso his Contests Richard Staples and John Natshaw
for part of the sayd tyme being froced to leave the worke before
it was finished by the heat and stench aforesayd And further cannot depose./

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the foresayd
Commissioners did by removing the sayd wheat into Granaries, and dressing
and skraeneing use their best endeavours and diligence to care the
same and make it merchantable. And he hath heard that Justice
Vincent of Peckham bought the same of the sayd Commissioners and is
like to be a looser by it. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the nynth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith, he cannot
depose.

To the tenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by reason
of the present great plenty of Corne in England good sound
wheat undamnifyed is usually bought and sold att present in and
about London for 20 s per the quarter, and in other places att
distance from London as hee hath heard and beleiveth att cheaper
and easyer rates. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he hath for theis .2. or three yeares past wrought for
the Commissioners of prize goods in Corne shipps, according as corne prizes came
in to be unladen, and saith the foresayd shipp fortune was the last shipp
he wrought upon for the sayd Commissioners and the names of the rest he hath forgotten
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.353v Annotate
and saith e wrought not by day wages, but bu the measures of
corne att 3½ d a quarter portage and 12 d a [?skene] over measure. and was payd
by the Commissioners of the prize office, or their Agents by warrants from
the sayd Commissioners.

To the 2d Interrogatory he saith he wrought not upon any shipp fr the
sayd Commissioners in or about June July or August last save the sayd shipp ffortune
onely, the burthen whereof or master he knoweth not. and saith
he began to worke upon the sayd shipp in July last but the particular
day remembreth not, and wrought upon her about 15 dayes
first and last. (and saith there was about one thousand and sixty
quarters of wheat taken out of the sayd shipp. and 230. quarters thereof
was layd up att Saint Saviours dock in a granary there. and about
830 quarters att the Bridge howse:- And this deponent nor any
other private person to his knowledge had any of the sayd wheat.
or so farr as he hath seene. And otherwise cannot depose

To the .3. Interrogatory he saith he is perswaded in his conscience that
the foresayd stench and heat of the sayd corne was the occasion
of the sayd Spriggs death for that the sayd Sprigg was before
the sayd worke an healthy and lively man, and in the sayd worke gron
faint weake and ill and so contynued to his death still complaining
of the surfitt of heat and could he gott in the sayd worke and
otherwise cannot depose.

To the .4. he saith the sayd wheat could not possibly have bene turned
in the sayd shipp nor have bene preserved from perishing without
carrying into open aire and sweet and good granaries. and
otherwise saving as aforesayd cannot depose.

the marke 'H' of the sayd [MARKE, RH SIDE]
Henry Walter
----
The same day

The sayd Richard Staples to the Interrogatoryes

To the .1. he saith he hath bene employed by the Commissioners for prize goods
in Corne prizes but not in any other worke att severall tymes as
Corne prizes came to their hands for 2 or 3 yeares past and saith
he wrought not by day but by measure att 12 d the score of
quarters. [?XXXXXXXXXXXXXX] into the Lighters and 18 d per score of quarters measured into Lighters
and receyved his wages from the Commissioners of the prize offices or their
Agents by their warrant, and the sayd fortune was the last he wrought upon and
hath not in memory the names of the rest.

To the .2. he saith in June July and August last he wrought for the
sayd Commissioners upon the fortune aforesayd whose master or burthen he saith
he knoweth not, and not uppon any other shipp in or about that tyme for the sayd Commissioners. and he so wrought
upon the sayd shipp about ten or 12 dayes first and last and
began in July but remembrers not the particular days And saith
about 1000 and some odd quarters of wheat were taken out of
the sayd shipp and the greatest part thereof was disposed of in the
Bridgehowse and the remaynder in a Granary att Saint Saviours
dock. And saith himselfe nor any Labourer or other person had any
part of the sayd Corne to their owne private use so farr as this deponent
knoweth beleiveth or hath heard And further cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.355r Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first he saith he was Harponier in the Lewisa and a board her att
the tyme of seizure having belonged to her [?8] yeares, and hath made
8 voyages in her and the sayd shipp ws built about 11 yeares agoe
and the Hunter about 12 yeares agoe as he beleiveth. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the .2th. he saith the Lewisa this last voyage came not from Greenland
about by Scotland, but came through the Northerne English Channell
and was not in the downes since se came from Grenland before they
were seized by the shipps of this Commonwealth. and beleiveth the same of
the hunter and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d. he saith the Lewisa was seized upon the Hollands Coast ten leagues
off the Texell upon or about the tenth day of August last. and the
hunter as he hath heard was seized about the first of September but
upon what Coast knoweth not.

To the 4th he saith he went in the sayd shipp Lewisa the outward voyage to Greenland
which was as he saith begun from Rochell in ffrance, under dominique
de marjeria Master of her, and John [?Sonegry] a la Chippe Pilot or
Steersman, and the sayd Marieria and Sonegry a la Chippe were
both aboard her att the tyme of seizure. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the .5. he saith he never was with the sayd shipps or either of them att Amsterdam.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.355v Annotate
The 25th day of November 1653.

Pickering and Company against certaine)
Goods taken up in the shipp the Castle Rammekins)
pretended to belong to one Timothie Gray)
Smith)

Examined upon two allegations on the behalfe
of the sayd Pickering and Companie.

1)

Humphrey Primat of the parish of Saint
Sepulchers London Haberdasher aged 40 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.356v Annotate
The 25th of November 1653

The Keepers et cetera against the)
ffortune of Stetin.)

Examined upon the sayd alleagtion.

7)

Thomas Vincent of Peckham in the Couynt of
Surrey Esquire aged 46 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

having notice by intimmations afficed
publiquely upon the Exchange London that there were severall
parcells of shipp corne to be sold by the Candle by the Commissioners
for prize goods arlate, hee reparired upon the say of publique
sale accoding as the sayd intimmation directed to the place of sale
where severall merchants were there mett, and a sample
of wheat being there produced being as was sayd a sample
of wheat laden aboard the ffortune of Stetin, being the shipp
in this allegation meant and intended as he beleiveth,...

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.357r Annotate
CHECK THIS PAGE]
Franris? Alowyn of the parish of ??? Olaius?? Son??works
in the County of Surrey Loaly...??? aged 6?8 yeares
or t..reabonts??? a wittnes Sworne and examined???
Hepofoly?? (Hopefully??) and saith as followely .???.

To the first ?rone and spin? Articles of the allegation(abbriviation) in the first plan he saith he ?????
To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith ?? hash??(harsh)?? ???
sayd ?innolpy gray say and acknowldged that he was att the ??me of the sayd shipp yard w/not? bene? ?soizad?. A
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.358v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the fifth Interrogatory This Rendent saith the sayd shipp when this Rendent
last saw her att the Barbadoes was a two deckt shipp with about 20
gunnes and furniture and rigging convenient. and saith she was
then in a farr better plight and condition and more fitt for sale
or use than now she is, but what shee was then truly worth he cannot
Judge, and more particularly being none of her Company cannot
depose.

To the sixth Interrodatorie he saith he last saw the sayd shipp in the possession
of the sayd Captaine Lawrence in behalfe of his sayd owners at [?Mery] att
the beginning of the yeare 1652. and she was then of the burden of 260 tonnes or
thereabouts. and further cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
----
The sayd Roger Lawrence to the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first and second Interrogatories he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp 12 yeares when
this deponent 12 yeares agoe bought her att Dover of Captaine John [?HadXXX]
and David Spicer for seven hundred eighty five poundes the greate
part whereof this deponent payd to the sayd Vendors ere in London
and hath heard them acknowledge the receipt of the rest, and hath [?received]
and now is in possession of their bill of sale of the same And saith [?XXX]
[?XX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.359r Annotate
Waterer [--------] was and is owner of the 1/4ter part of the sayd shipp. Robert
Crowly 1/8th part. Richard Allen of 1/8th part. John King of on e 1/8th part. And
saith Isaac Gold was owner of 1/4 part therof and this deponent of 1/8th 
part, which sayd 4th and 8th part [-------------] is now the right and 
[--------] of Mr Shute and Mr Baker and others that empound the sayd shipp.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.360r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Edward Creswell of Wapping in the Countie of Middlesex
Mariner sometymes Carpenter aboard the John and
Abigall aged twenty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videliet.

To the first second third and fourth Srticles of the sayd allegation this deponent
saith that in the monethes of May and June 1652. the arlate shipp the John
and Abigail was and remained att or neare the port of Quinsborough and
she arlate Daniell Morgan was Master of her and this deponent was the
same tyme Carpenter aboard her, and saith he saw then there fifteenne
bundles of hemp of the marke in the margent laden aboard
the sayd shipp consigned for this port of London, but the wight thereof
or of any packes of canvas consigned to the sayd Hardres, or to whom the
sayd hemp was consigned or what freight should have bene paid to the
said Morgan for the sayd Canvas or hempe or what is the usuall freight
per last of such goods from Quinsborough to this Port, or whether any bills
of lading were firmed for the sayd goods or noe, he saith for his
part he knoweth nothing thereof. And otherwise cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.360v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd alleagtion

3

John ffiske of Wenaston in the Vounty of Suffolk
late Boatswaynes mate of the John and Abigail aged 21. yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.361v Annotate
XXXX

The 29th day of November 1653

The Keepers against the ffortune)
of Stetin.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Rowe dt.

8)

Richard Symkins of Seething Lane London Wyne Cooper aged 42
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the ninth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath many
tymes bene present att the sale of prize goods by the Candle by the Commissioners
for prize goods, and hath observed that the sayd Commissioners have usually
sold such goods in that manner att considerable values, and so much
dearer than Merchants can usually sell goods of like quality in their warehowses, and att
such high rates that the buyers have bene loosers by their bargaines
as this deponent himselfe hath severall tymes bene. And more
oparticularly saith that about the latter end of July last past hee bought
by the Candle of the foresayd Commissioners a parcell of wines att a favourable
value, videlicet att a rate or price double to the true value of them
whereby this deponent hath lost a very considerable summe of money
videlicet 50 li or thereabouts in [?XX] tonnes of wines And more over saith that the sayd parcell of wines upon a reveiw
by skillfull appraisers have bene appraised att one third part of the moneyes this
deponent bought the same for. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Upon the rest he is not examined by direection

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. Interrogatories he knoweth nothing thereof.

Richard Simkins [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The same day Examined upon the sayd alleagtion.

9.

'Roger Morris' of Crowched ffryers London Wyne Cooper aged 44 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.362r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 7:th he saith That for about 3. or 4. yeares last past the arlate
Joachim Verpoorten hath had and held  Correspondencie with the
producent arlate, as being ffactor to and for him, and for the said Lemmermans
Agent and Correspondent the said John Scrother is well knowne and commonly accompted which this deponent well knoweth
by his familiar acquaintance with the said John Scrother And otherwise cannot
depose:/

To the 8:th hee saith, That it is notorious and publiquely knowne, that the shipp
the black Cocke (John ffransen Haen Master) being in her Course
for Amsterdam with her Cargazon of wines and other goods was mett
withall surprized and taken by some shipp or shipps of this Commonwealth
and brought into England, there being then aboard her (as this deponent
for the reasons aforesaid firmely beleiveth) the 47 butts of sack arlate or thereabouts
for the accompt of the arlate John Scrother the true Proprietor thereof./
And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the Interrogatoires:-/

To the first negatively:-

To the second hee saith the interrate John Scrother hath dwelt at Saint Lucar
in Spaine for all the time of this deponents knowledge of him videlicet for about 7
yeares last in the Play or Strand of Saint Lucar  aforesaid and saith hee is a nNative of
Hamburgh And otherwise he cannot depose./.

To the third he saith hee oftentimessaw the said John Scrother, and was with
him both on land and aboard the shipp the black Cocke during her last being
at Saint Lucars in Spaine, And otherwise cannot depose, save hee did not see the
47. butts of wyne in the said producents Custody or possession before the lading./

[ADD DATA]

To the 9th hee saith hee is a Native of Neere in Luyckland, and hath lived
for the most part of 11. or twelve yeares last at Saint Lucar in Spaine, And otherwise
negatively to every oart thereof:-/

[ADD DATA]

To the 11:th hee saith the said shipp the black Cock by the
relation of the said John Scrother and John ffransen Haen began her
outwards Voyage from Dantzick, and in this deponents sight came laden to Saint
Lucars with pipestaves and clapboards consigned to the said John Scrother
onely for the accompt of the said Lemmermans./

(To the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.364v Annotate
To the second Interrogatorye he answereth That the Shipp the Saint John was
bought in Holland as is predeposed by this endents master his orderand the master
of the said shipp as he hath heard is a ffleminge belonging to Dunkerk And
otherwise to theis Interrogatory he cannot answeare.

To the third Interrogatory hee answereth That about may last past hee this rendent did
see a Letter written by this rendents said master to the foresaid Marin and Henry [?XXXX]
[?XXXXXX] soe neere as hee can remembber about the moneth of the said moneth of may wherein his
said master did give advice to the said Martyn and Henry Deiner resident att Nantz to
follow the order and direction of the foresaid Mr Brake concerning the ladding
of the shipp the Saint John arlate

[ADD DATA]

repeated before Doctor Clerke and
Doctor Godolphyn

Adyan Beyer [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The 10th day of October 1653.

Samuel Beake sonne of Arnold Beake one of the
producents in thei cause aged about one and twenty yeares a
witnesse produced sworne and examined in this cause deposeth as
followeth vbidelicet./

To the first article of the said allegation hee sayeth That for theis twelve moneths
last past or therabouts the arlate Mr Arnold Beake this deponents father Peter
Mathewes and John Dolins arlate have beene and yet are commonly accepted reputed
and taken to be the lawfull owners and Proprietors of the Shipp the Saint John arlate
her tackle and furniture And further cannot Depose

To the second article of the said allegation hee sayeth that more than by relation and
report of this Deponents father and others interessed in the said shipp and her lading
arlate hee cannot Depose.

To the third article of this allegation he sayeth That uppon perusall of this deponents
said fathers bookes of accompt committed to his keepinge and his case hee fyndeth
That uppon the sending of the Loade aboard the Saint John arlate from
London to Nants uppon the sale and vending of the said Comoditie a
parcell thereof was [?imposted] [?into] wynes which were there bought by the order
and direction of this deponents father and the rest of the producents arlate
and was for their accompt and adventure to be transported to Dover where the [?XX] of the shipp arlate [?XXXX] to
receive orders for transportating them into Flanders and accordingly [?XXXX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.365r Annotate
order given to one Mr Michael de Haze at dover beinge this Deponents father his
correspondent to send the said Shipp uppon her arrivall at Dover for
flanders And otherwise then as by information out of his said fathers bookes
of accompt and by Letters which he hath seene tending to the effect of what hee
hath predeposed [?XXXXX] hee cannot say:

To the foureth article of the said allegation and to the twoe schedules or exhibits therein
mentioned beinge shewne into him this deponent and carefully perused by him att the
tyme of this his examination hee sayeth and Deposeth That hee was not present
at the firminge and signeing the sayd twoe schedules arlate but sayeth That Martyn
and Henry Domer were and are this Deponents said fathers factors and agents at Nants
[?and] [?Tolonne] and of this deponents knowledge there hath for divers yeares beene
correspondence by way of Letters and advice betweene this Deponents father and the said
Martyn domer and Henry domer and hee hath seene divers sand severall papers and
Letters of advice which have come to this Deponents father and under theis
hands and this deponent is veryly perswaded in his conscience that the twoe exhibits
or Schedules arlate now shewne unto and perused by him were and are firmed by
Martyn or Henry Domer it being an ordinary and usuall course amonge merchants
and factors That where twoe are imployed in company one doth usually subscribe
and firme for both in both their names and soe hee sayeth That the sayd Martyn and henry Domer have
usually donne in those Letters which this deponent hath received in
theire names And sayeth That the said twoe
exhibits were and are the very Letters and papers which were sent unto this deponents
said father from Xantz concerning the sale of the Leade and buyeinge of the wynes
and [?XXXXXX] arlate and were sent to this Deponents father bu the ordinary Poast long
before the seizure of the Shipp and goods arlate And further to this article hee cannot
Depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.365v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
James Hedgethorne Servant unto Mr Arnold
Beake one of the producents in this Cause with whom
hee hath lived for theis twoe yeares
and halfe last past or thereabouts aged 17 yeares or thereabouts
produced and examyned Deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.366r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 12th day of October 1653/

Stone and Symonds against Collyer and Roay)
Budd Allen)

Uppon the allegation
given on the behalfe of Arnold Beake

'Geoffrey Neape' of Maldon in Essex mechant
aged forty yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced
and examyned in this caause deposeth as followeth

To the fowereth article of the said allegation whereuppon by direction he is only examyned
he
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.367r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
13th October 1653

The Clayme of Anne Gold wyddowe and Decliffe Bryson)
for the Ship the Angell Gabriell whereof Barne)
Williamson was and is master taken by Capteyne Browne)
Thomas and Company by the Shipp called the Wheele of)
Fortune Smyth ffrancklin)

uppon the allegation given on the behalfe of
ffrancklyns Clyent

Isaack Golde sonne in law of
Anne Gold one of the producents aged
about 24 yeares a witness sworne and
examyned deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.367v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

----
The 14th of October 1653 uppon the allegation on the
behalfe of the Claymers

The Clayme of Beake and Mathewes for)
the Shipp the Saint John and the wynes)
and vinager in her)

4

Peter Some Servant unto Mr Peter
Mathewes one of the producents in this cause
with whome hee hath lived for allmost theis
five yeares last past aged about 21 yeares a
witnesse produced and examyned Deposeth as followeth.

To the first articles of the said allegation hee sayeth and DEposeth That for theis twoe
moneths last past his this deponent with Peter Mathewes one of the Producents in this cause hath [?beene]
and still is commonly reputed the lawfull owner and Proprietor of the Shipp the Saint
John arlate his Tackle and ffurniture and sayeth hee hath heard his masyer Mr
Peter Mathews acknowledge That the arlate Mr Arnold Beake had likewise a share
in the said Shipp And further cannot depose saveinge That hee this deponent
by the directions and order of the said Peter Mathewes one of the Producents did
pay for the said Shipp upon a Bill of Exchange drawen from Holland uppon his 
said Master by order of one Mr Anthony De Sonde the summe of fower hundred
and nynty pounds seaven shillings sterlinge mony

To the second  3d and 4th articles of the said allegation and to the schedules therin
mentioned beinge shewne unto him and present by him att the tyme of this examination hee
sayeth and Deposeth That within the tyme arlate there were Laden aboard the Shipp
the Saint John arlate one hundred and fiftie pigges f Lead which hee sayeth were to be
transported to Nants in ffraunce but sayeth That as hee hath credibly beene informed
and beleiveth The said Shipp and her Ladeinge in her course thither was [?mett with]
satyed annd seized by Capteyne Greene and others but was afterwards by her
meanes of this deponents said master cleared by order of this Court And afterwards
did proceed onwards in her said voyage to Nants where accordinge as by Letter
of advice sent to this deponents said Master  [?XXXXX] appeared the said Lead was safely
delivered and with the proceeds thereof the wyne and Vineager arlate were laden aboard
the said Shipp att Nants from whence they were to have bene transported to
Dunkirke for the accompt and adventure of this deponents 
Master and Arnold Beake arlate as their factors and correspondents And sayeth
That hee hath sene Letters which were sent from [?Martini] and Henry Dorner in the sayd
[?XXXX] mentioned whereby it was and is certified to be his said Master That the said [?XXXX]
predeposed
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.368r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The Clayme of Gold and Beysen for the)
shipp the Angel Gabriel whereof)
Bernd Williamson was master)

uppon the allegation given on the behalfe of
Decleffe Beysen

Thomas Harrison of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
merchant  Taylor aged 33 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse
produced and examyned in this Cause deposeth as followeth
videlicet
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.368v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
26th of October 1653

A Business of examination of witnesses for)
the perpetual Remembrance promoted on the)
behalfe of the Governor and Company of)
English merchants tradeinge to Ginney)
Bynney and Angola and other places in)
the parts of Africa Budd)

Lancelott Staveley of London merchant [?aged]
about 32 yeares a witnesse produced sworn and
examyned in this Cause deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.370r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
Thomas Crispe of London merchant aged about 50
yeares a witnesse produced sworne and examined in this cause
deposeth as followeth

To the second third fowreth fifth and sixth articles of the said allegation hee sayeth and deposeth
That for theis twenty yeares last past or thereabouts hee this deponent hath beene imployed
by the Company of English merchants tradeinge for Guinny and Bynny in Africa and
divers tymes within the said tyme hath made voyages from London thither and from thence
backe againe And thereby well knoweeth the Ports of Cormantine Arma[?trabe] and the [?trade]
and traffique thereunto belonging. And sayeth That the ffactors and agents of and for the
Gynney Company arlate did formely purchase the said Ports of Cormantine and
Anomaboo and the whole [?Xeads] of the Country were thereunto of the Kinge of ffan[?tine
whoe was commonly reputed the Cheife Comannder and [?pXXXX] thereof and by
his order and Command were putt in peaceable and quiet possession thereof
whereof being soe possest of as afforesaid the said Company att theire Costs and charges did build
a Castle att Cormantine and an [?howse] att Annamabo for the [??setlement] of their afayres
and aqu[?XXX]eringe their ffacorues and tradeing there And to declare and give notice
uppon the arrivall of any shipp at the said Ports That the same did belong to the
English hee sayeth That there was delivered to the Captayne or Comannder in cheife
of the Towne and Port of Anamabo an English fflagg which was displayed usually uppon
the arrivall of any shipp And likewise sayeth That in the yeare 1649 hee this deponent
being imployed bu the Guinney Company [?XXXXX] as theire Principall ffactor and
Commannder for the Gould Coast for the said Companys use did Purchase of the King of
ffa[?bie] arlate the Port of Cape Coast and all the Trade of the Countrey [?neere] thereunto
adioyning whereby he this deponent [?XXX] the said Companyes ffactor was putt in quiet and peaceable possession
thereof where there was a howse built and a ffactory erected for maynteynences
of a trade there where this deponent some tymes hath Lived
and att other places and Ports which were purchased and
designed

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.370v Annotate
design for the said improvement of the said Companyes trades and ? parts Where likewise he sayeth by this deponents order there was fflagg staff ? ? and the English Cullours to be displayed upon the (arrested) ? of ship att that port to the end that ? might take notice That the said did belong to the English ? ? couvert Depose saveing as ? this deponent had important business w(hi)ch required this deponent ? said Port of Cape Coast commonly he came thither albeit his place of Residence for the most ? att Cormantine arlate To the 7th.8.9:10:11.12:13 and fowerteenth and 21 (bales) of the said ? he sayeth and deposeth That he this deponent within the time imployeth as Principall factor and Comander for the said Guinney Company att their ffactorys of Cormantine and Cape Coast ? and other ? ? ? Ports belonging to them was often (sellected) by the King of ffarsoo and his Brother Henniqua thereto Agent of the Country to build a howse att Cape Coast aforesaid whoo promiseth this Depponent That they would not ad? of any other man whatsoever into the said Port ? ? ? such as did belong to the English Company and by them were ? to the purpose gave order to one Mr Thomas Gardiner factor att that ? to provide ? and ? to ? the same ? upon the 20th Aprill 1640 He this deponent ? from the Coast of Cormantine to the foresaid Port of Cape Coaste arlate where he sayeth he this deponent was ? and -cometh by the foresaid Henequa and the ? men and merchants of that Countrey who -tayned him first with a ? from the King and after from each greate man for himself ? ? this deponent That the Countrey was this deponents ? that purpose ? use of the English Company And further sayeth That after (sallitatons) and this deponents speech endith with the natives ? to the ? of the Countrey he this deponent treateth with the said Hennequa the Kings Brother for the use of the said Company And he sayeth That upon the said treaty It was agreed and ? ? this deponent on the ? Companyes pt and the said Henequa and the forman on the said King and Countryes pt as followes or to the same effect ? That this Deponent should pay for the said Port and whose Trade in that Country ? of ? and ? of Arsvita? to the king for his pt and to the said Henequa and Cheife man ???? in all to £64 sterling money besides the greate charges of ? the howse to the ? ? All wch according to the said Agent being p(ai)d ? the said Henequa caused the Drums to be beaten And summoned all the people to the place where the said English howse was


HCA 13/68 f.371r Annotate
was building And there made publique proclamation in the presence of them all That he had sold the said Port of Cape Coast arlate and the Trade thereof to him the deponent for the use of the said English Companie And that noe white man whatsoever might have any thing to doe there but such as should have order from this deponent and also to that effect English Company But sayeth That some few dayes after the premises There arrived at the said Port of Cape Coast one Henrick Carloff with a (? as her? probendal) from (her? way) of Sweden whoe there Landed and meeting with the said Henreque by his ? and extraordinary guiftes obteyned leave to build a house there w(hi)ch this deponent being informed of did send one Mathew Backhowse to give the said Carleoff notice That the said Port and the Trade of the Country thereabouts was bought by him this deponent to and for the use of the Guinney Company ? and therefore that he would forswere to procede further therein? or to that effect But notwithstanding this deponents notice to the said Carleoff ? afforesaid He the said Carleoff did procede in the building a howse there And uppon the 28th of May - then next followeing the said Carleoff ?? for ther? and uppon the Possession Ports and Trade belonging to the English Guinney Company ? did come to the Port of Anemaboo ? about thre myles distant from the Castle of Cermantyne afforesaid and there ? likewise caused a howse to be built whereof this Deponent having information gave the said Carleoffe likewise advice to desist imparting to him the right w(hi)ch the English Company had to the said Port and trade thereof but this deponent sayeth that the said Carleoffe did proceed forward w(i)th compleating and building of the said howse at Cape Coast afforesaid to the greate damage and preuidice of the said English Guinney Company in theire Trade and ? ? those p(ar)ts and as this deponent hath heard &amp; -eth? since this deponent -ding? away from out of Guinney w(hi)ch was about this time thre yeares - ? the said ? - Ports of Cape Coast and Anamaboo have - beene (savd) (kept) by Swedish Company whoe ? ? the said English Guinney Company of theire possession thereof and ? ? the Trade of those two Ports from the said English Guinney Company to ? whereby this deponent ? ? the said Guinney Company of London Was and is ? to the sume of twenty thousand pounds att the least And further ? depose saveing that the - promises he remebreth the better for that dureing his this deponents Residence in the Guinney ? Kept a journal of the procedings of all businesses whatsoever happens there
Godolphin                                        Tho(mas) Crispe
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.371v Annotate
27th of October 1653.

John Ladd of London marriner aged about 31 [?yeares]
a witnesse produced and examyned in this Cause Deposeth
as followeth videlicet

To the first second third fowreth fifth and sixth articles of the said allegation hee sayeth and
deposeth That for theis fowrteene o fifteene yeares last past hee this deponent
hath traded to and for the Coasts of Guiney and Bynney att severall tymes
and for some part of the said tyme as Comannder of severall shipps
being imployed for divers mercahnts of London to those parts and thereby well knoweth
the said Coast and the Ports of Cormantine and Anamabo arlate which hee sayeth
were commonly reputed and knowne to be Ports and places belongeing to the
English Guynney Company and that the ffactors and agents of the said Company
have beene in quiet and peaceable possession thereof for many yeares

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.372v Annotate
5th of November 1653

Hall against Hill and)
Hopgood Clements ffrancklin)

Richard Hamlett of Tinmouth in the
County of Northumberland Mariner aged
about 54 yeares a wittnes produced
sworne and examined deposeth as followeth

To the first article of the Libell he deposeth and sayeth That the arlate
John Hall was in the month of May 1653 arlate Master
and Commander of the shipp called the Robert and Elizabeth arlate
of his this deponents certaine knowledge being then aboard
her as a passenger, And further he cannot depose

To the 2ed he saith That he sawe the Master or Commander
of the shipp the Accord arlate ad that he is a young man about 30 yeares but doth not know that his
name was John Cobbold, And otherwise he doth not depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.373r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
On the same day./

2)

John Pilbrow of Ipswich Mariner where he
was borne and bred, aged about 18 yeares, a
wittnes produced and sworne and being examined he
deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]

the arlate John Hill was the true and lawfull Master
and [?XXX] of the shipp the Robert and Elizabeth

[ADD DATA]

To the 2d article he sayth he this deponent saw the
master or Commander of the shipp the Accord arlate but
that he knoweth not what was his name And further he
deposeth not

[ADD DATA]

the Robert
and Elizabeth was bilged and by readon threeof the next flood
she did dinke with her Lading of Coales All which he this
deponent well knoweth being on board the said shipp
the Robert and Elizabeth all the time And further he
deposeth not


HCA 13/68 f.374r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The sixteenth day of November 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Affidavit.

John Shorter of London Merchant, and William
Warren alsoe of London Merchant, sworne before the
right worshipfull william Clerke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie say
and depose by vertue of their oathes.

That the shipp the Joseph of London otherwise called the [?XXX] of dunquirke
(Vincent [?Riflet] master) of the burthen of two hundred and fiftie tonnes
or
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.374v Annotate
[ADD TEXT]

Wm Warren [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 29th of November 1653./

Joson against Read and Wilson for their)
Interest in the Golden Lyon Smith Budd)

Examined upon an allegation [?XXXX] on the behalfe of
the sayd [?Read] and Wilson./

Ius

James Wilson of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Mariner Masters [?second] Mate of the shipp the Charles (whereof
the sayd Thomas Wilson is Master) aged 36 or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet/

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that the shipp the Golden Lyon arlate was seized and taken on a [?XXXX]
happening in the moneth of ffebruary 1651 English style in a River
in Virginia called James River and neere a place there called
[?Pagan] Creeke, which River Ebbeth and floweth and is within the dominions
of the Commonwealth of England there, the premisses hee knoweth, being
Masters second Mate of [and XXXXX] the shipp the Charles which shipp was one of the three
shipps which tooke and seized the sayd shipp the Golden Lyon, and he this
deponent did assiste in the takeing and seizeing thereof And further to
these articles hee cannot depose/

To the third and 4th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee being Masters second Mate of the Charles aforesayd and present and Privie
to the agreement by him this deponent now deposed of well knoweth that
before the seizure aforesayd of the sayd Shipp the Golden Lyon, the arlate
Nathaniel Joson Captaine [XXXX XXXX] of the William and John, Abraham R[XXXX] Commander
of the shipp the Seaven Sisters arlate, and the arlate Thomas Wilson
Commander of the Shipp the Charles arlate, having arrived all in safety
at Virginia aforesayd and having all Commissions by authority of
Parliament to seize all shipps and goods whatsoever which they should
then finde tradeing at Virginia, did enter into mutuall agreement
each with other to assiste each other in the surprizeing of all such [?XXX]
as they were by their sayd Commissions authorized to surprize, And
did alsoe at the same tyme agree each with other that they would
proportionally share and divide amongst them the sayd J[X]sson [?Read] and Wilson
and their severall Mariners and SEamen of their severall companyes
all
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.375v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 11th article hee saith that the Golden Lyon aforesayd is of the
burthen of two hundred tunnes and upwards and had 27 men and two
boyes belonging to her, and that 15 of the sayd men and the two boyes were
on board her when shee was seized and shee had then 15 gunnes mounted and
diverse musketts, pikes, swords and other armes and ammunition aboard her And
further hee cannot depose./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.376r Annotate
her lading in case the sayd Wilsom and his Company (of which this deponent is one)
be by this Court adiudged to have a share thereof, but what that share will be hee
knoweth not but expecteth what shall fall due to him as Masters Mate of the Charles
whereof the sayd Wilson is Captaine, and saith hee beleeveth of noe part thereof be
adiudged to the sayd Captaine Wilson and his Company hee this deponent
shall have noe share therein, neither in deede doth hee desyre any unlesse the same
doe iustly appeare to be due unto him/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.376v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

2us

Samuell Gardner of Ratcliff in the County of
Middlese Mariner Gunner of the shipp the Charles (whereof
Thomas Wilson is Captaine) aged 48 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.378r Annotate
The 30th day of November 1653./

Examined upon the sayd allegation/

3us

Lawrence Thompson of Radcliff in the County of Middlesex
Mariner Boatswaine of the shipp the Charles (whereof Thomas
Wilson is Captaine aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet/

To the 1 and 2 articles of the sayd allegation hee saith that hee this deponent
was not present at the seizure of the Golden Lyon arlate vodelicet not in the boate
that first seized her, but saith hee was in the shipp the Charles whereof
Captaine Wilson is Comander and in sight of the sayd Golden Lyon when shee was
seized, and saith shee was soe seized in the moneth of ffebruary 1651 and
upon a Wednesday (to the best of this deponents now remembrance) and was soe
seized in a River of Virginia which ebbeth and floweth called James River
and neere a place there called Pagan Creeke in the dominion of the Common
wealth f England arlate And further saving his subsequent depositions hee cannot depose

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.379v Annotate
deponent and some others of the shipp the Charles her Company
went with their boate to the Golden Lyon and hee this deponent went on
board the sayd shipp./

[?Lawr] Thompson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 1st of December 1653:-

Examined upon the said Allegation:/

The Clayme of the said John Scrother for 47.)
butts of sack in the black Cock)

Vide V.C:-

2us./

John Stootenpape Native of Neere in the lands of Liege
aged 33. yeares or therabouts a Wittnes sworne and examined saith

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth That
about the moneth of October 1652 last past this deponent being at Saint Lucar in Spaine
(where hee hath for the most part of 11. or 12. yeares last resided) and being there
familiarly acquainted and frequently Conversing with the arlate John
Scrother a Hamurger who of this deponents certaine knowledge hath also resided at Saint
Lucar aforesaid as ffactor for Hamborough Merchants for about theise 7. yeares last
past, the said John Scrother the partie producent in this Cause told and acquainted
this deponent, That forasmuch as The shipp the black Cocke allegate was [?bXX]
designed to goe to Amsterdam with a Cargazon of goods for the account of the
widdow and heires of Hans Lemmermans of Hamborough, and that hee had
in his hands at that time goods or effects disposed off belonging to the said Lemmermans
sufficient to make up the full Cargazon of goods for the said shipp then lying
nere Saint Lucars, hee therefore intended to putt and lade aboard the same 50 butts
of Spanish wynes for his owne accompt, And saith That shortly after the said
discours, wherein the producent  expressed his resolution as aforesaid, this rendent
departed from Saint Lucars for Cadiz where hee shipped himselfe in a Hamburgh shipp
for Ostend, so that hee left the said shipp the black Cocke, (John ffransen
Master) takeing in her lading at Saint Lucars, and by that meanes did not see the
actuall lading of the said 50. butts of wyne, but firmly beleeveth  for the
reasons aforesaid, That the said producent did really cause that or about that
number of butts of sack to be laden aboard the said shipp for his owne accompt to
be sent as aforesaid, And for that this deponent being a WyneCooper by profession
and having in that quality for severall yeares been assistant to the said John [?ffransen]
for the marking of vessels of wyne and other goods by him transmitted to Holland
and other places, is well acquainted that the marke in the margent allegate [?XXX]
is one of the usuall markes of the said producent, And otherwise saving his [?XXX]
depositions hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 4th article and schedule therein mentioned but not annexed hee saith he
knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 5th hee saith that for all the time of this deponents knowledge of the [?producent]
as aforesaid hee the said producent was and is commonly and generally
accompted a Native Subject of the free Citie and State of Hamborough, [?and]
by reason of his residence in Spaine is there accompted and esteemed a Subject
of the Crowne and hath so bin for all the time aforesaid, And otherwise
saving his foregoing and subsequent deposition hee saith hee cannot depose/

To the 6th hee saith, hee beleeveth, it is usuall for Merchants residing in [?Spaine]
and transmitting goods and merchandizes from thence in regard of the hostilitie
between ffrance and Spaine and to prevent the Capture and Condemnation
of their goods and Merchandizes by the ffrench Kings shipps and Subjects to make use
of and insert the names of Neutrall and free persons in bills of lading for the same Whereas [?notwithstanding]
(the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.380r Annotate
L.L.L.

The 20.th day of december 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Dittelof Stolly and company for his goods
in the Saint John of Hamborough, master)
Joachim Meesters)

vide lib: [?P.P.P.]

Vacat quia non repetit.

4.us

Joachim Meesters of Hamburgh Master of
the said shipp the Saint John of Hamborough, aged 34
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined saith as
followeth, videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.380v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 20:th day of december 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Christian Balden of Hamburgh)
for his goods in the Saint John of Hamburgh. (Master)
Joachim Meesters))

Examined upon the said Allegation

vacat

4.us/

Joachim Meesters of Hamborough Master of
the said shipp the Saint John aged 34. yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet

(To the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.381r Annotate
To the first and second article of the said Allegation and schedule annexed and bill of
lading thereby exhibited and now showne to this examinate he saith and deposeth
That in or about the moneth of August last past this deponent received or
heard his said shipp the Saint John then lyeing at the kay of Roane and bound
for Hamburgh, from the arlate Christian Bolden Merchant of Hamburgh
two bailes of Merchandizes marked with the marke in the margent, and one
sack of goods, with the marke of the Custome howse of Roane, and one truncke
and one Portmantle, and some other goods folded in paper which hee remembreth
not, all to be transported and carried in his said shipp from Roane to
Hamburgh upon the accompt and adventure of the said Christian Balden and
there to be delivered unto him or his assignes for his use and accompt, And
after the receipt of the said goods aboard his said shipp hee this deponent aboard his said shipp at Roane signed
three bills of lading all of one tenor for the same, two whereof hee delivered
unto the said Christian Bolden, and the other hee reserved to himselfe, And
saith tht the bills of lading now showne unto him and remaining in the Registry
of this Court were and are two of the originall bills of lading signed by this
deponent at Roane, and that the contents thereof were and are true and
reall and no waies fictious. Hee further saith That at the time that
the said shipp and her lading were lately surprized and taken by a private
man of warr of this Nation, some of the said private manof
warrs Companie comeing aboard the said shipp tooke one trunke
with severall wearing cloathes and goods therein belonging to the sayd Christian [?le] Balden in this deponents presence
but the particulars or particular worth therof hee knoweth not. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3. and 4th hee saith, That saving his bills of lading for the goods
aforesaid to which hee referreth, and saving that the said Christian Bolden
att Roane severall times affirmed to this deponent that the goods predeposed were
his owne proper goods, and laden for his owne accompt and adventure as
aforesaid, hee this examinate cannot further depose not being present at
the buying of or paying for the said goods.

To the 5th hee saith that after the said goods and the rest of the said shipps
lading were taken aboard her at Roane she departed thence with the same for
Hamborough , and in her Course thitherwards was mett withall surprized and
taken by a Private man of warr of this Nation, and brought into dover
where they now remaine, this deponent being Master of and aboard his said
said (sic) shipp at the time of the said seizure. And further saving his foregoing
depositions hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the 6.th and 7th hee saith the said Christian Bolden came passenger aboard the said
shipp along with his said goods, And otherwise referreth himselfe to his
foregoing deposition./

To the 8.th hee hath knowne the said Christian Bolden for about 6. yeares
last
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.381v Annotate
last a Merchant and inhabitant of Hamburgh, and a Subject of that
free State, and for such the said Christian Bolden ws and is commonly
knowne and reputed, And saith hee is now in London about the recovery
of his said goods. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last hee saith his foregoing deposition is true:-/

To the Interrogatories:- [CENTRE HEADING]

To the second hee saith hee is a Native of Hamburgh, and hath dwelt there
from his infancie./

To the 3. hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Christian Bolden for
about 6. yeares last past, who during that time of this deponents knowledge
hath bin and is a Subject of the free State of Hamburgh and inhabitant
there. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 4. hee saith he departed last from Hamburgh in the moneth of October
1652. last past to Roane in ffrance, which place and port he hath frequented
for 18. yeares last past or thereabouts, and never was at any other Port in
ffrance, save onely nce at Callis./:-

To the 6.th 7. 8. 9. and 10.th negatively And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 11. hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 12. hee saith hee hath satisfied the demannds thereof in his foregoing deposition

To the 13. hee saith the said shipp the Saint John is laden with brandewine
peece goods and vinegar, and that hee this rendent laded aboard the same
for his owne accompt 37. hogsheads of Vinegar 480. bundles of dying [?wood]
53. groce of cards, 350. reames of paper, and 142, reames of paper in a [?XXX]
40. dozen of earthen ware and 16. pair of stockins, And doeth not [?knowe]
beleeve or hath ever heard that any ffrench or dutch Subject or Subjects of
the king or States interrate hath any part or interest in any of his said
shipps lading:- And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 14:th negatively to every part thereof./
----
The 21.th day of December 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Claus Luys of Hamburgh for)
his goods in the Saint John of Hamburgh. et cetera.)

Examined upon the said Allegation:-/

vacat

4us/

Joachim Meesters of Hamborough Mariner
Master of the said shipp the Saint John aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined saith as
followeth videlicet:-

To the first and second article of the said Allegation, and schedule  or bill
of lading thereby exhibited and now showne to this examinate hee saith and
(deposeth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.382r Annotate
deposeth, That in or about the moneth of August last past, hee this deponet
received on board his said shipp the Saint John then lying at the kay of Roane in
ffrance and bound from thence for Hamborough three bales, two fatts and one
Case of Merchandizes respectively marked and numbred as in the margent

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

from Dierich Warnicke his precontest and John Robert a ffactor at Roane,
who severall times before at and after the lading of the said goods, did severally
declare and affirem to this deponent that the said goods were by them to be laden
and afterwards really were laden for the proper accompt and adventure of the
said Claus Luys a Merchant of Hamborough, and were to be transported
in the said shipp from Roane to Hamburgh aforesaid and there to be delivered
to the said Claus Luys or his assignes for his accompt. And saith that
shortly after the lading of the said parcells of Merchandizes this deponent at
Roane signed three bills of lading all of one tenour for the same, two whereof
hee delivered to the said John Robert in the presence of derick Warnicke his
precontest, and the third hee kept and brought aboard his said shipp wherein the
same was seized, and by the seizors, as hee beleeveth, brought or sent up into
the Registry of this Court where it now remaineth, And saith that the said bill
of lading now showne into him was and is one of the originall bills of lading
signed by this deponent at Roane for the goods aforesaid, and that the Contents
thereof were and are reall and true, and so had and done as therein is
contained. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the third and fourth hee saith, hee was not present at the buying of the
goods in question, and therefore saving his foregoing deposition and saving the bill
of lading predeposed, to which hee referreth himselfe he saith hee cannot
depose:-/

To the 5th hee saith the said shipp the Saint John being in her Course from
Roane for Hamburgh, the goods in question, and the rest of her lading then
being aboard her were surprized and taken by a Private man of warr of
this Nation and broght into the Port of Dover by the seizors, this deponent
then being Master of and aboard his said shipp:-

To the 6th hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Claus Luys for 20 yeares
last and upwards a Merchant and Burgher of Hamburgh, and a Subject
of that free State, and for such the said Claus Luys was and is generlly
knowne at Hamborough. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 7th hee saith his foregoing deposition is true:/

To the Crosse Interrogatories:-

To the first Interrogatorie he saith hee cometh to be a Wittnesse in this Cause at
the instance of Mr ffrancklin a Proctor of this Court, And otherwise
negatively. And further cannot depose.

To the second hee saith hee this rendent is a Hamburger by birth and
habitation there from his infancie./

To the third hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 4th hee saith hee came last from Hamburgh with his aid shipp the
(Saint
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.382v Annotate
Saint John in the moneth of October 1652. alast past, and sayld thence to
Roane upon a merchandizing Voyage, and hath for 18 yeares used to saile
thither, and never was in any other Port att ffrance save onely once at Calles

[ADD DATA]

To the 13. hee saith his said sgipps lading consisteth in brandewine peece goods
and Vinegar, and that hee hath for his owne accompt aboard the same 37
hogsheads of Vinegar 480 bundles of dying stuff 53 grosse of Cards. 350 reames
of paper and 140. reames of paper in a baile, 40. dozen of earthn ware and
16. pair of stockins. And doeth not know nor beleeve that any part of
his said shipps lading was or is for the accompt of any french or dutch
subjects of the King of ffrance or States of the United Netherlands

To the 14. negatively to every part thereof./
----
The 23.th day of december 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The keeper of the Libertie of England et cetera)
against the shipp the Saint John Baptist (Brother)
Baxon Master) seized by certaine shipps)
in the service of this Commonwaelth Budd)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe of this
Commonwealth./

Brother Baxon of Stockholme in Sweden
Mariner Master of the said shipp the Saint John Baptist
aged 37. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, That hee was Master of and aboard the said
shipp at the time of her late seizure by the shipp the Hector and one other and se
hee had bin for about 5. moneths last past and came first aboard her at
Blackwall in the river of Thames And further deposeth not./

To the second hee saith, That Mr Lucas Lucie a Merchant living here in London was
and is the sole Owner of the said shipp and of her tackle apparrell and furniture

To the third hee saith, That the said Mr Lucas Lucie bought the said shipp of
the Officers of the prize Office London about 5. moneths since and this deponent
helped to carry the monies from Mr Lucies house to pay for the said shipp
and that the same was so paid by one Mr Abraham servant to the said Mr
Lucas Lucie in this deponents presence./ And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 4.th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition And otherwise cannot
depose, saving hee was constituted Master of the said shipp by Mr Lucas Lucie aforesaid

To the 5.th hee saith, the said shipp hath formerly within the time interrate
belonged to some Port of Holland, and being taken by some of the shipps of
this Commonwealth was condemned for Prize and sold as aforesaid. And
otherwise cannot depose, saving his foregoing deposition, and saving, that before her
(seizure
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.383r Annotate
seizure shee came from Saint Martin in ffrance for Dantzicke.

To the 6th hee saith hee this deponent bought provided and laded the present lading of
goods aboard the sayd shipp at Saint Martins in ffrance by and with the assistance of one ffrancis
Claeson a ffactor residing at Rochell, and  paid for the said goods with readie monies
which hee receaved of the said ffactor by the  order and appointment of the said Lucas
Lucie. And saith the salt aboard his said shipp was bought at Saint Martin aforesaid
of one Monsieur de ran, and that the bradewine s aboard were bought at Rochell, but of
whom hee remembreth not. And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 7th hee saith hee is a Native of Noortstrand in Holsteyn, and is a Subject
of the Crowne of Sweden, and otherwise negatively saying the present shippes
ladeing was and is totally and solely for the accompt of the said Lucas Lucie, And
further cannot depose./

To the 8th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoingd eposition/

To the 9th hee saith hee is a Burgher of Stockholme in Sweden, and hath no part or
any manner of interest or share in the said shipp or goods laden aboard her, nor doeth hee
expect anyadvantage by the restitution thereof.

To the 10th hee saith, the said shipp began her outwards voyage from Blackwall
towards Dunquirke about 4 monethes and a halfe agoe in her ballast and about 5. or 6. chests of sugar and from thence
to Saint Martins aforesaid, and saith the said Chests of sugar were taken in at
Gravesend by the appointment and for the accompt of the said Mr Lucie And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 11th and 12th negatively to every part thereof referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition./

To the 13. hee saith hee cannot depose, and knoweth not of any moneys taken up
uppo Bottomry, since the beginning of the Voyage in question./

To the 14. hee saith the saiid shipps present lading consisteth of 1201. quarters
and about 58. measures of salt bought and laden at Saint Martin aforesai, and
20. peeces of brandewine bought at Rochell, and all bound in the said shipp for
Dantzicke as aforesaid, and saith that none of the said shipps lading since the
time it was received, hath of this deponents knowledge beene unladen before
her late seizure.

To the 15: hee saith, That since his departure from Blackwall as aforesaid hee
did not see nor ever was amongst any of the ffleete interrate. And otherwise
negatively.

To the 16: hee saith hee hath heard of severall sea fights between the Hollanders and
the English, And otherwise cannot depose

To the 17th hee saith, hee this deponent had 32. peeces  of eight and rix dollars and one
ducatoon, and 19 English shillings, and two or three pence aboard his said shipp at
the time of her seizure, which was taken away from him immediately after the
seizure by Samuel Howet Vice Admirall aboard the Speaker ffrigat
And otherwise negatively.

To the 18th hee saith there were one bill of lading, a Dunquirke Attestation
and some other papers aboard at the time of the seizure, all which this deponent
immediately after the seizure shewed to the said Vice Admirall, and  saith that
since his coming from Saint Martins as aforesaid there were  no papers burnt
torne or throwne over board his said shipp concerning the shipp or lading or
(other
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.383v Annotate
otherwise And further cannot depose/

To the 19. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And saith there
were three bills of lading all of one tenor signed by this deponent for and concerning
the whole shipps Cargo, and saith the said bills were made in the names of
Hance van Bermingen and Elias Turcken ffactors residing at Dantsicke, to
whom this deponent was to deliver his said shipps lading for the accompt predeposed.

To the 20th hee saith hee had 14. eaters aboard his said shipp, three whereof were
Zealanders and the rest all Easterlings as hee beleeveth

To the 21. hee saith, his said shipp was to make her full discharge at
Dantsicke aforesaid.

To the 22th hee saith hee had a Passepoart aboard his said shipp from the
Queene of Sweden and an attestation from Dunquirke, both which were
true and reall/

To the 23. hee saith hee had no more but the Swedish Colours aboard his said
shipp at the time of her seizure.

[ADD DATA]

Brodeor Backesen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 23th day of December 1653:/

The Keepers of the Libertie et cetera and Melvill and)
others against the shipp the Supply and Batson and)
others. Budd Suckley)

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

2us./

Richard Fiveash of Wapping in the parish
of Stepney Mariner aged 36. yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith as followeth videlicet/

[ADD DATA]

...the shipp the Abraham allate
(James Leshly Master) was dammaged by bilging upon an Anchor and
that upon the Saturday evening...

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.384r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 8th hee saith, That in the moneths of August and September last past
of this deponents certaine knowledge being then aboard the said shipp the Supply
as one of her Companie upon weekely wages upon an intended voyage, the said
shipp the Supply had onely foure anchors belonging to her

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.384v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

3us./

Robert Hall of Shadwell in the parish of
Stepney and Countie of Middlesex Ship wright aged
26. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnesse sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet./

To the first second third and 4th articles of the said Allegation hee saith
and deposeth, That in the moneth of September last past (the particular
date this deponent remembreth not) this deponent at the instance and by the
procurement of the allate James Leshly and others the Owners of the said ship
the Abraham allate, came aboard the same in the river of Thames
purposely to be assistant in the weighing and reparation thereof, and
that being so aboard, hee this deponent with the arlate Henry Oakes
(and others
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.385v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 30. day of december 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of ffrancis Sloyer and others)
Merchants of Hamborough for the shipp the)
three kings whereof Joachim Beane was)
Master and for her tackle apparrell and furniture)
Smith Budd)

Examined upon an Allegation on the
behalfe of the said Claymers

j.us/

Joachim Beane of Hamborough
Mariner Master of the said shipp the three
kings. aged 34. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet

To the first and 2 articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That at
or about the moneth of March last past, hee this deponent being at
Middleburgh in Zeeland did there by the order and appointment of the arlate
ffrancis Sloyer Merchant of hamborough buy the said shipp the
three kings. arlate of and from the arlate Jacques Oyselle a Merchant
of Middleborough aforesaid, for the accompt of the said ffrancis Sloyer
(and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.386r Annotate
and this deponent and at the buying of the said shipp as aforesaid, hee this
deponent Contracted and agreed to pay for the same the summe of sixe
thousand gilders the first penny, for the payment whereof this deponent drew
bills of Exchange upon the said ffrancis Sloyer, which by him were accepted and
paid unto the agents or assignes of the said Jacques Oysell and former owners of the said shipp at Hamborough and Amsterdamm
And further saith That presently after the buying of the said shipp, hee this
deponent by the order and direction of the aforesaid ffrancis Sloyer did really disburse lay out and
expend about the fitting and furnishing out of the said shipp upon a Voyage
to sea the summe of foure thousand five hundred gilders more or thereabouts
which said moneys were remitted to this deponent at Middleborough by bills of exchange
from the said ffrancis Sloyer of Hamburgh, and accordingly this deponent received
the same, and therewith paid for the severall necessaries bought and provided by
him for the fitting and furnishing of the said shipp. The premisses hee knoweth
being as aforesaid Master of the said shipp, and being, as predeposed, particularly employed
and entrusted ina nd about the same. And otherwise saving his subsequent
depositions hee saith hee cannot depose:-

To the 3. and 4:th hee saith That by the order and direction of the said ffrancis Sloyer
hee this deponent shortly after the buying fitting and preparing of the said shipp
departed Master thereof from Midleborough to Saint Mallo in ffrance, where he
arrived in or about July 1653. and there tooke in a lading of linnen Cloath
and other goods to be transported in the said shipp to Cadiz or Saint Lucar
in Spaine, and being in her Course from Saint Mallo thitherwards in Companie [?with]
6. or 7. other shipps bound also from that Port for Spaine, shee was surprized
and taken by the Saphire ffriggat a shipp in the immediate service of this
Commonwealth, and brought up with her lading into the Port of Plimmouth
Which hee knoweth being master of and aboard his said shipp during the said
transactions. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 5:th 6. 7: and 8:th hee saith and deposeth, That at such time as the
said shipp the Saphire friggat first came up with the shipp the three kings
in question, the Admirall of the fleete so come from Saint Mallo as aforesaid
was a heade, and the Vice Admiall of the said fleete a sterne of the said
shipp the three kings, and shee in the niddle between them during the fight
which happened as followeth, That is to say the said Saphire ffrigat at her first
comeing up discharged a whole broade side at the said Admirall and presently
after another broad side at the Viceadmirall, and also shott a broad side at this deponents
shipp and that without any precedent haling of any of the said shipps
whereupon the said Admirall and Vice Admirall shott againe at the Saphire
frigat, and continued fighting her about the space of an hower, before this deponents
shipp discharged any one gunn or made any opposition against the said Saphire
ffrigat, the said Admirall and Vice Admirall still lying a head and
a sterne of her as aforesaid, so that shee could not possibly gett away from
them. But the Admirall of the said ffleete perceiveing that no shott was
(made
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.386v Annotate
made against the sayd Saphire friggot by this deponent notwithstanding his
ingagement and Contest as aforesaid, hee the sayd Admirall threatned
this deponent that in Case he continued without shooting at the said ffrench
hee would sinke his said shipp the three Kings or words to that effect
whereupon this deponent apprehending the danger that hee and his said shipp
were in by the said Admiralls resolution, and finding then no possibilitie of
escape, he told his Companie that upon necessitie some shott must be
discharged from his said shipp expressely to avoyd sinking by the said
ffrench Admirall, but this deponent then also expressely charged his Gunner
and companie so to place the gunn that they might be sure to shoot
short, and not to hitt the said Saphire frigat or her Companie, whereupon
about 6. or 7. shotts during the said fight were by this deponents said
Gunner and Companie discharged, all of which of this deponents sight and
observation fell farr short of the said Saphire frigat, shee then indeed being at
such a distance that her brasse gunnes could not endammage the said frigat
or Companie. And so much in effect the Captaine of the Saphire frigat and some
of his Companie declared to this deponent shortly after the seizure, videlicet
That they well preceived that during the fight this deponents ship made
for the most to the Leeward of the said Admirall and Vie Admirall, and
appeared not to be willing to engage; or words to that purpose. And
otherwise cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.387r Annotate
might all have escaped and not have beene seized by the said frigatt.
And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot depose./

To the 12. 13. and 14:th hee saith, That hee this deponent and his Companie
after the first coming tup perceiving the said shipp the Saphire friggat to be
a man of warr of theis Commonwealth, used all possible meanes to escape from
between the said french Admirall and Vice admirall, and as soone as possibly
hee could did accordingly gett away from them, and in acknowledgement of and
submission to the English before the beginning of the fight predeposed, this
deponent caused his sailes to be stooke to the said frigatt, And further
saith, That hee this deponent did never make or enter into any Consortshipp
or resolution with the said french shipps to assist them in fighting against
any shippe of this Commonwealth, but onely before their departure from
Saint Malo did enter into a Consortshipp and promise to assist them with his
said shipp to the best of his power against the Turkish searovers in case
they hapned to meete with any of them, And so much hee saith hee this
deponent doth during his aboade in ffrance, and alsoe since his last coming to
sea from thence did severall times declare and signifie unto his said shipps
Companie, All which hee deposeth upon his certaine knowledge, being as
aforesaid Master of and aboard his said shipp during the occurrences
predeposed. And further cannot depose:-

To the 15:th hee saith, That the arlate ffrancis Sloter and this deponent the
Owner of the shipp the three kings arlate were and are both of them Hamburgers
borne and inhabitants there and Subjects of that free State, and for
such well knowne and commonly accompted. And further cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories./

To the first hee saith hee hath had his settled aboade at Hamburgh ever
since his birth, and saith hee hath one part of the three parts in the said
shipp. and hath three bailes of Canvas or sale cloath marked 'B', six
hogsheads of powdered porke, six hogsheads of powdered beef, four
pipes pr great vessells of pease, and 7000 lb of bisketts in baggs, two rolls
of saile cloath loose, two Cases with each three Castors besides severall
other  small parcells of goods which hee now exactly remembreth not, And
otherwise negatively saving his foregoeing deposition.

To the second hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And further
cannot depose./

To the third hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the fourth hee saith, That as for the 4500 gilders aforesaid, which hee this
deponent employed in and about the quipping fitting and furnishing of the
said shipp, hee received the same from the hands of the said Jaques
([?Oiselle]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.387v Annotate
Oiselle of Middleburgh, (of whom this deponent bought the said shipp [?as ?aforesaid]
and that by Vertue of
a letter of Credit which this deponent had brought along
with him from the said ffrancis Sloyer from Hamborough, which said
monies the said ffrancis Sloyer and this deponent caused to be repaid unto the
said Oiselle his Correspondent at Hamburgh, And otherwise negatively
referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 5:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition saying hee dod not
bring the said monies along with him from Hamburgh, and saith That since
the buying of the said shipp this deponent went to Hamburgh, and there was infor
med that the 6000 gilders [?for] the said shipp were by the said francis Sloyer
paid in the bancke at Hamborough with his owne proper monies, the third
part of which moneys, this deponent caused to be repayd unto the said ffrancis
Sloyer out of this deponents owne moneys, which hee had in and caused to be
payd him by the hands of one John Joachim Vlacht a Burgher and Merchant
of Hamborough, who also paid this deponents third part of the 4500
gilders aforesaid unto the said ffrancis Sloyer./:

To the 6:th hee saith hee was and bought the said shipp at Middleburgh
in March last past, but saith the said ffrancis Sloyer was not then there

To the 7:th hee saith, That hee this deponent drew all the monies predeposed
by bills of exchange and by letter of Creditt upon ffrancis Sloyer aforesaid, who ordered
the payment thereof, but this deponent was not personally present at the [?paying]
of the monies upon the said bills And otherwise cannot depose:

To the 8.th hee saith hee this deponent had no direction in writing but onely
by word of mouth from the said francis Sloyer to goe to Middleburgh to
buy a shipp, as accordingly this deponent did./

To the 9:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoingd eposition, And otherwise
saving his said deposition, negatively:-/

To the 10:th hee saith hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition wherein
he hath satisfied as much as hee can to the demannds of this Interrogatory
And otherwise negatively:-/

To the 11:th hee saith hee this deponent caused all the shott that were made by the
said shipp in the fight interrate between the said french shipps and English Frigat to be under the Hamburgh Colours and had
then no other but them on board, and saith that the other shipps had french
Colours uner which they fought, and the said Saphire frigat the Colours of this
Commonwealth.

To the 12:th hee saith, the said shipp the three Kings after shee was [?gotten]
cleare of the ffrench shipps aforesaid, did not give any assistance to the
said Saphire frigatt./

Jochim Bene [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.388r Annotate
The 4.th day of January 1653: [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-/

2.us

John Thomas De Milute of Cadiz in
Spaine Merchant aged 23. yeares or thereabouts
a Witnes sworne and examined.

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith That
in or about the moneth of September last past hee this deponent
being at Saint Malloes in ffrance saw the shipp the three Kings allate lying there
and taking in a lading of linnen Cloath and other goods wares and
Merchandizes to be transported in the same for Spaine. And otherwise
saving his subsequent depositions hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 5. and 6th articles hee saith and deposeth, That after the said shipp
the three Kings was so laden as aforesaid, shee departed in Companie with
six ffrench shipsp from Saint Mallo towards Cadiz in Spaine and in her
Course thitherwards was mett with by the Saphir ffrigatt a shipp in the immediate
service of this Commonwealth, which at her first comeing up with the said fleet
without any haleing of them or any of them, so farr as this deponent observed
discharged one broad side upon the french Admirall and presently after another and upon the
Vice Admirall of that fleete and soe the said frigat and the said french
shipps continued ingaged for an howre and upwards, during which time the
said shipp the three Kings being to the leeward of the said french shipps
did not discharge one gunn nor made any opposition against the said English
shipp. The premisses hee knoweth being a Passenger in and aboard the said
shipp the three Kings at the time of the passages predeposed And further
cannot depose:-/

To the 6. 7. and 8:th hee saith and deposeth, That this deponent being as afore
said passenger in and aboard the said shipp the three kings, after the fight
had continued above an hower between the sayd English ffrigat and the two french
shipps, heard some of the Company of the said french Admirall speake
Spanish to his precontest Joachim Beane, That if hee woud not shoot and
assist him in the fight afaints the said Saphire frigat, they would sinke the said
shipp videlicet the three Kings, or words to that effect, Whereupon this deponent heard the
said Joachim Beane give order to his Gunner and Companie to fire some
6. or 7. gunnes at random, and to bee sure to place them so that they might not
reach or endammage the said frigat or Companie, and saith that accordingly
some 6. or 7. gunns were discharged from the said shipp the three Kings, but at
such a distance and in such a manner, that to the best of this deponents Judgement
they did not nor could not possibly come neare the said frigat, at any waies
to annoy or endammage her. Which hee deposeth upon the reasons aforesaid
And further to theise articles hee saith hee cannot depose:-/

To the 9th hee saith, That as soone as the said shipp the three Kings were
([?gott]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.388v Annotate
gott from under the Commannd of the said french shipps, shee sailed away and
left them fighting with the said Saphire frigat, in which fight they continued
for about 4. howres after their escape as aforesaid
And further cannot depose/

To the 10. 11. 12. and 13th hee saith and deposeth, That the saud french
Admirall was a shipp of the burthen of about 200. tunns, mounted with
22. pieces of Ordnance and having as this deponent beleeveth about 80 men
aboard her, and the said vice Admirall was a shipp of about 300. tunns
having 16. peeces of ordnance, and about 30. or 40. men aboard her, And
saith That the Master and Companie of the shipp the three Kings aforesayd
during the first howre of the said fight or engagement upon this deponents
observation, did use all possible endeavour to disengage themselves from the
said french Admirall and Vice Admirall, And about 7. or 8. of the
Clock in the night the said Saphire frigat comeing up with the said
shipp the three Kings [?XXX] the said Master Joachim
Beane perceiving presently caused his sailes to be strooke, and surrendred to the
said frigott. And saith that upon the very first comeing up of the said
frigatt, and before the fight predeposed begann, the said Master
Joachim Beane did also strike his sailes, to the said frigatt. And
otherwise cannot depose&amp;#124;:-

To the 14th hee saith, That this deponent being at Saint Mallo aforesaid
before the said shipp the three Kings departed from thence as aforesaid
did heare that there was a Consortship made amongst the Commanders
of the ships of the fleete aforesaid to fight against the Turkes in
case they mett them, but never heard of any Consortshipp made or
resolution taken by them to fight the English. And otherwise cannot
depose./

To the Interrogatories./:- [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith, That hee this deponent is a Native of Cadiz in
Spaine, where and in the West Indies hee hath lived for ten yeares last
past,

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Joachim [?Beene]
for about three yeares last past, and saith hee the said Beane is
commonly and generally reputed a Hamburgher, And otherwise cannot
depose

(To the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.389r Annotate
To the .3. 4. 5. 6. and 7.th negatively, And otherwise knoweth nothing of
the particular demands therein contained.

To the 8.th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof/

To the 9:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the 10:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, And otherwise
cannot depose:-

To the 11:th hee saith, That during the fight predeposed the said shipp the
three kings wore the Hamborough Colours and the other shipps of the said
ffleete wore the french Colours and the said English shipp fought under the
English Colours/

To the 12:th negatively. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

Juan Tomas Milutt [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin:/
----
The 5:th day of January 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

3.us/

John Martin of Saint Lucar in Spaine Merchant
aged 26. yeares or thereabouts a Witnes sworne
and examined upon the said Allegation saith and deposeth
as followeth videlicet:-/

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That in or about the moneth of September last this deponent being at Saint
Mallo in ffrance saw the shipp the three Kings articulated there receiving her
lading of linnen Cloah and other goods wares and merchandizes and
caused some goods to be laden in the same for his proper accompt. And
otherwise cannot depose./

To the 4:th and 5.th hee saith, That after the said shipp the three Kings had
received her lading as aforesaid. shee departed with the same from Saint Malo
in Companie with 5. or 6. other shipps, and being in her Course towards Spaine
was mett with by a man of warr of this Commonwealth, who tooke the said
shipp the three Kings and her lading and brought the same into Plimmouth
And further saith, That when the said English man of warr first
came up with the said shipps the Admirall of the said fleete was a heade
and the Vice: Admiralll a sterne of the said shipp the three Kings, and
presently upon the coming up of the said English man of warr, shee lett
flye a whole broad side at the french Admirall, and presently after
tacking about discharged another brode side at the french Vice admirall
without haling of them, so farr as this deponent then heard or observed,
And saith the said shipp continued fighting for about the space of one
houre before the shipp the three kings made any shott against the said English
man of warr. The premisses hee knoweth to be true being a Passenger
(in
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.389v Annotate
in and aboard the said shipp the three Kings at the time of the
occurences aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the .6. 7. and 8:th hee saith, That the Admirall of the said
french fleete perceiving that the Master of the said shipp the three
Kings did not assist the said two shipps against the English man of
warr, threatned him to sinke his shipp the three Kings in case hee did
not shoot against the English shipp or words to that effect, which this
deponent heard, whereupon also in this deponents hearing, the Master of the said
shipp the three Kings told his Companie the necessity that there was [?XX]
discharging some shott, and accordingly gave order to his Gunner and
Companie to discharge some few shott, but withall ordered them so to [?fire]
their gunns that they might be sure not to hitt or endammage thee said
English shipp or Companie, and thereupon some five or 6. shott were
discharged at that distance, and in such manner that the best of
this deponents Judgement they neither did or could reach the said English shipp
And otherwise hee cannot depose:/

To the 9:th hee saith That so soone was the said shipp the three Kings
was gott cleare from the said french Admirall and Vice Admirall
and being without the Command of their Cannon shee sailed away
leaving them engaged with the said Englishman of warr, who continued
in fight with them for about three or fower howres longer.
And further
cannot depose/

To the 10. 11. 12. and 13:th articles hee saith and deposeth, That the
french Admirall was a shipp of about 200. tunns as this deponent [?conceiveth]
and had about 22. pieces of Ordnance and about 70. or 80. men as
hee beleeveth aboard her. and the said Vive Admirall was of the burthen [of]
about 300. tunn having about 22. pieces of Ordnance. and the like number
of about 70. or 80. men aboard her as hee beleeveth, And the said [?shipp]
the three Kings was and is a shipp of 240. tunn, mounted with [?XX]
pieces of Ordnance and having about 30 [?a 40 moore] men aboard her [?XXX]
hee saith hee verily beleeveth, That in case the said shipp the three Kings
had to the best of her force engaged with the said french shipps against
the said English man of warr, they might all of them in all [?probability]
have escaped and not beene taken. And further saith That after [?XXX]
of the fight aforesaid, the said English man of warr coming up to the
said shipp the three Kings. and perceiving the frigat [?ArXXXXX] was [?XXX] the Master therof [?XXX]
any opposition at all surrendred, Hee also [?XXX]
of this deponents observation the Master and Companie of the said shipp
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.390r Annotate
the three Kings did use all possible diligence to escape and free themselves from
the said ffrench shipps, And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee
cannot depose./.

To the .14:th hee saith, That being at Saint Malo aforesaid before the departure of the
said fleete from thence; did creibly heare, that they had entred into a Consort
shipp in Case they mett with any Turkes shipps, to fight with them, but never
heard of any Consortshipp or Contract made amongst them to fight againts
any shipp of this Commonwealth. And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the Interrogatories:/

To the first hee saith, hee is a Native of Saint Lucar in Spaine, where hee hath lived
for the most part from his infancie, And otherwise cannot depose , saving that the [#]

[# LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]
hee this deponent hath .23. bailes of linnen and
mercerie wares for his owne accompt, and hath
no part or interest in the said shipp:- 
Juan Martins [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Joachim Beane for about 4
yeares last past, and saith hee is commonly accompted an Hamburger And
otherwise cannot depose./

To the 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the buying building
or paying for the shipp interrate, And otherwise then negatively hee cannot further
depose to the Contents of these interrogatories:/:-

To the 8. 0. and 10.th hee saith that saving his foregoing deposition hee cannot depose.

To the 11:th hee saith, That the shipp the three Kings interrate wore the Ham=
borough Colours and the English the Colours of this Commonwealth:-

To the 12. negatively; And further cannot depose

Juan Martins [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin./
----
The 10th of January .1653:-/

Examined upon the said Allegation:-/

4.us./

Simon Pariente of Cadiz in Spaine Merchant
aged 27. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet./

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith hee
cannot depose, saving that this deponent being at Saint Mallo about the
end of July last past did there see the arrivall of the shipp the three
Kings in question, (Joachim Beane Master) and saith this deponent saw the sayd
shipp there receive in her lading of linnen cloath and other goods and
Merchandizes to be transported in her from thence to Cadiz or Saint Lucar
in Spaine./

To the 4:th and 6:th hee saith and deposeth, That after the lading of the
said shipp the three Kings at Saint Malo as aforesaid, shee departed thence in
Companie with five or 6. french shipps towards Spaine, and being in her
Curse thithewards was mett withall by a frigat or man of warr in the
immediate service of this Commpnwealth, who tooke the said shipp the
(three
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.390v Annotate
three Kings and her lading and brought the same into Plymouth
And further saith, That when the said English man of warr first
came up with the said fleete of shipps, shee presently wthout any [?XXX]
of them, (so farr as this deponent then heard or observed) discharged a full
broad side at the french Admirall, and presently tacking about discharged
another broad side at the Vice-Admirall of the said fleete, and so the
said frigatt or Englishman of warr, and the said french Admirall and
Vice Admirall continued engaged in fight for about an hower before
that the said shipp the three Kings shott or discharged one gunn, and
during that time the said shipp the three Kings lay to the leward
and close under the Commannd of the said ffrench Admirall and
Vice admirall. and could not within the time aforesaid cleare or discharge
her selfe from them, The premisses hee knoweth being a Passenger in and
aboard the said shipp, and seeing and observing the passages predeposed
And otherwise saving his subsequent deposition hee saith hee cannot depose

To the 6. 7. and 8:th articles hee saith and deposeth, That ee this deponent
being as aforesaid passenger in and aboard the said shipp the three Kings
during the said fight heard some of the said ffrench Admiralls Companie
call upon the Master of the three Kings and Companie to shoote at the said
English frigat, and threaten to shoote at and sincke the said shipp the
three Kings, in case they refused so to doe, or words to that effect, Whereupon
the said Joachim Beane the Master perceiving the danger and and his said shipp [?if]
hee did not shoot at the instance of the said french Admirall,
being then under the Commannd of the said Admirall and ViceAdmirall
in this deponents hearing spake to his Gunner and Comanie, telling them
the necessity of discharging some gunns for the satisfaction of the ffrench
and prevention of their owne undoeing, and thereupon gave them order
to make some shott, but withall commannded them to place the gunnes
in such manner, that the shott might come short of, and not hitt or endanger
the said English frigatt or Companie, after which some five or 6 shotts
were discharged from the said shipp three Kings, but at such a distance
and in such manner that this deponent and others then present clearly [?XXX]
that the bullets fell farr short of the said frigat, and did not nor
could hitt or endammage her. And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the 9:th hee sith, That presently after the said shipp the three Kings
was gotten cleare from under the Commannd of the said ffrench shipps
shee sailed away, leaving them, and the said English frigat still engaged
in fight which continued for about 3. or 4. howres after. And further
hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the 10. 1. 12. and 13. articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That the said french Admirall was a great shipp of the burthen of [?XXX]
([?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.391r Annotate
200. tunn having two and twentie peeces of Cannon aboard her, and about
800. men, and the said ffrench Vice-Admirall was of the burthen of about
300. tunn. having also abput 22. peeces of ordnance and about 70. or 80.
men, and the said shipp the three Kings was and is a shipp of the
burthen of about 200. tunn, having aboard her 10. peeces of Ordnance
and about 30. men more or lesse, And this deponent saith hee verily
beleeveth, That if the said shipp the three Kings had made opposition to
the utmost of her force together with the said ffrench shipps against the said
Englishman of warr, they might with their joynt power in all probability
have all of them escaped away from her. The premisses hee deposeth for the
reasons before mentioned, And further saith, That after the said fight was
ended between the said Englishman of warr and french shipps, and about 9
of the Clock' in the night, the said Joachim Beane and Companie perceiving
That the said frigat pursued them, presently caused his sailes to be strooke
and staied for the coming up of the said frigat, who without any opposition
at all tooke the said shipp the three Kings and her lading. Hee also saith
That of this deponents observation, The said Master and Companie of the said shipp
the three Kings did from the first beginning of the fight predeposed
utterly decline and declare their aversnesse from any engagement against the English
man of warr, by reason the said shipp was a free shipp, And did
doe all possible endeavour to gett cleare of the said ffrench shipps, as accordingly
they did so soone, as in this deponents judgment, it was possible for them to doe
And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the 14 and 15th. hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the Interrogatories/ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. hee saith hee this rendent is a native of [?Betunes] in Artois, and hath inhabited with his family in Cadiz where hee hath lived
for all or most of the time interrate, And otherwise negatively, saving hee hath
eight bailes of linnen and one of mercerie ware aboard the said shipp the
three kings for his owne accompt:-

To the 2. hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Joachim Beane for
about 4. yeares last past, and saith hee is commonly accompted a Hamburger
(borne
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.391v Annotate
borne. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing of the [?XXX]
buying or paying for the shipp the three Kings in question, And otherwise
then negatively, hee saith hee cannot further depose to theise interrogatories.

To the 8. 9. and 10.th hee saith hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing
deposition And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 11.th hee saith the said shipp the three Kings did constantly
carry the Hamborough colours, the ffrench shipps the french Colours
and the Englishman of warr the English Colours during the fight
predeposed/

To the 12.th negatively. And further cannot depose:-/

Simon pariente [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
1654

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin./
----
The 11:th of January: 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

non repetit

5.us/

John Denholme of Edinburgh Merchant
aged 27. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnesse sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet:

To the first second and thrid articles of the said Allegation hee saith hee
cannot depose./

To the 4. and 5:th articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth that
after the shipp the three Kings in question had in or about the moneth
of [BLANK IN MANUSCRITPT] last past taken in her ladeing of french linen Cloath
and other goods and merchandizes, shee departed from Saint Malo towards
Spaine in Companie with about 6. french sgipps, and in her Course
thitherwards was mett withall and taken by the Saphire frigat in the
service of this Commonwealth, and brought into Plimouth, And saith
That presently upon the comeing up of the said Saphire ffrigat [?XXX]
said fleete of shipps, shee without ant precedent haleing of the [?XXX]
discharfed a full broad side against the french Admiral, and [?tackeing]
about discharged another broade side at the french Vice Admirall [of]
the said fleete, and saith the said shipps continued engaged in fight
for about an howre before the said shipp the three Kings discharged
any one gunn. shee then being to the Leewards of the said french Admirall [and]
Vice Admirall, and under the Commannd of their Cannon druing [?the]
fight predeposed. Which hee knoweth being a Passenger in and aboard
the said shipp the three Kings And seeing the premisses soe done [?XXXX]
And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 6. 7. and 8:th That during the said engagement the said french
Admirall in this deponents hearing called upon the Master of the [?XXXX]
the three Kings to shoote, and threatned that in case hee would not
(hee [?would]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.392r Annotate
hee would fire upon him, or words to that purpose, And saith that shortly
after , the Master of the said shipp the three kings caused some 6 or 7
shott to be made towards the said shipp the Saphie, severall of which shott
this deponent observed came farr short of the said frigat, and beleeveth not that
any of them did hitt or endammage the same, but that they were discharged with
a resolution to misse her. And further saving his precedent and subsequent
depositions hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 9th article hee saith That of this deponents observationm the said Master
and Companie of the said shipp the three kings during the fight aforesaid
expressed their wilingnesse, and used all possible endeavour to cleare themselves
from the saud ffrench Admirall and Vice Admirall and to decline ant
engagement or hostility against the said Saphire friggat, and that at last
shee did actually escape from them leaving them engaged with the said
friggat in a fight which continued about 3. or 4. howres after her said
escape, And verily beleeveth that if the said Master and Companie of the
said shipp the three kings had used their uttmost diligence and endeavour
they might very well have escaped and gott cleare away from the said Saphire
frigat. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 10. 11. 12. and 13th articles hee saith, That the said french Admirall
was a shipp of about 200 tunn, having 22 peece of Ordnance and about
80. mariners aboard her, as this deponent beleeveth, and the said french Vice
Admirall was a shipp of about 300. tunn, having also 22. pieces of
Ordnance and about 80. men aboard her, and the said shipp the three King's
was and is a shipp of about 200. tunn, bearing ten pieces of
Ornance, and about 30. or 40. men, And this deponent verily beleeveth
That if the said shipp the three kings had freely and to the best if
her force joyned with the said french shipps against the said frigat,
they might all of them very well have escaped from her, And further
saith, That about 9. of the Clock in the night immediately ensuing
after the said fight, the said Master and Companie of the shipp the three
Kings perceiving they were pursued by the said English frigatt, forthwith
they presently yielded without any opposition. The premisses this deponent
knoweth for the reasons predeposed And otherwise saving his foregoing
depositions hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 14:th and 15:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the Interrogatories./ [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. hee saith, That hee this rendent is a Native of Edinborough
in Scotland. and hath lived for about 4. yeares last at Cadiz in
(Spaine
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.392v Annotate
Spaine, and formerly sometimes at Edinburgh, and some time at [?XXX]
and other places in the East Countrey and elswhere as his Merchandi[?zing]
occasions called him, And saith hee hath twelve bailes of linnen and
10. tunn of wheate aboard the said shipp the three kings for his owne
accompt. And otherwise negatively:-/

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate Joachim Beene
for about 4. or 5. moneths last past, And saith hee is commonly]accompted a Hamburger. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7th hee saith, hee cannot otherwise than negatively
depose to the demmandes of theise interrogatories./

To the 8th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 9th and 10th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 11th hee saith, the said shipp the three Kings woare the
Hamborough, the french shipps the french Colours and the English
frigat the Colours of this Commonwealth during the fight predeposed

To the 12th negatively/.
----
The 11th day of January .1653:-/

Colonell Hugh Ryley and Companie Imployers)
of the shipp the Mary (John Welch Captaine))
against the shipp the ffortune (Peter Dirrickson Master))
Smith.)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe
of the sayd Imployers/

Rp EA

jus./

Peter Dirrickson of the Texell in Holland
Mariner Master of the sad shipp or Vessell
the fortune, aged 38. yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, hee this rendent was lately Master of the
ship the fortune, which lately belonged to the Port of Amsterdam and
her Owners were Yelmer Jacobson of Amsterdam, this deponent and Companie
Peter Peterson of Oudenzee and Thomas Brooderson of Oudenzee in Denmarke
and saith the shipp aforesaid was built at Vanderhuysen in Denmarke and
otherwise cannot depose./

To the second hee saith, that this deponent and Companie, and the said Yelmer [?afroresayd]
have 1/4. part in the said shipp the ffortune. Peter Peterson of one halfe parte
Thomas Broederson of 1/4. part, and saith hee this deponent bought his part
of a danish Skipper, whose name hee remembreth not for about 700. [?gilders].
And further cannot depose.

To the third hee saith, That hee this rendent and his whole shipps Company
(except one Dane) were and are Hollanders and subjects of the States of the
United Netherlands/


HCA 13/68 f.393r Annotate
To the 4th hee saith that the Owners aforesaid have respectively dwelt in the
severall places predeposed for all the time interrate, And were and are Subjects
of the King of DEnmarke, and States of the United Netherlands./

To the 5th hee saith, the said shipp the fortune is laden with malt and barley
which were taken aboard at Voremonde in Denmarke by order of the aforesaid
Thomas Broederson for his accompt to be transported to Amsterdam; and there
to be delivered to one John Cornelison vander Nenn a Merchant of that
place/.

To the 6th hee siath there were no bills of lading signed for the goods predeposed
And otherwise negatively. And further cannot depose:-/

To the 7th hee saith hee hath knowne the said John Cornelison vander Nenn
to whom the said goods are consigned for about 10 yeares last past, And otherwise
referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition./

To the 8th hee saith hee was fraighted from Amsterdam by the said John
Cornelison Vander Nenn upon a voyage from thense to Denmark, and to end at
Amsterdam, and was to have 1500. gilders fraight paid to him for the Voyage by the
said Vander Nenn as factor and for the said Thomas Brooderson./

To the 9th hee saith, his shipp was taken upon the open seas neare Jutland
haveing only Hollands Colours aboard, and one sall Danish flagg. And saith
hee never saw the Commission of the Captaine that tooke him./

To the 10th hee was fraighted as aforesaid, but without any Charterpartie. And
further cannot depose:-/
----
The same day.

Examined upon the said Interrogatories/

Rp.

2us.

William Meys of Worrom in Holland Mariner
aged 22 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined:

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee well knoweth the shipp the fortune interrate
Peter Dirrickson Master) and was one of his Companie at the time of the seizure
and saith the said shipp belongeth to Holland as hee beleiveth, And otherwise
cannot depose./

To the secoond hee saith he cannot depose./

To the third hee saith, the said Peter Dirickson the Master is a Hollander and this rendent and
all hos said shipps Companie (except one Dane) are also Hollanders./

To the 4th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 5th hee saith the said shipps lading consisteth of malt and barley laden
at Cortemonde in Denmarke, to be transported to Amsterdam. And further
cannot depose/

To the 6th hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 7th hee saith hee is a Hollander borne and bredd, but hath never bin
to ffrance And further cannot depose./

To the 8th hee saith hee this deponent was hired by the said Master at Amsterdam
upon a Voyage from Amsterdam to Denmark, and thence to returne to
(Amsterdam


HCA 13/68 f.393v Annotate
Amsterdam, where hee was to receive 34 guilders for the Voyage from the
Master.

To the 9th hee saith, there were Hollands Colours and a Danish flagg aboard the
shipp at the time shee was seized neare Jutland by Captaine Welch And
otherwise cannot depose./

To the 10th hee saith hee cannot depose:-

the marke of
William 'X' Meys [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The 11th day of January .1653:-/

Ryley and Company against the shipp or Herring busse)
the Saint Peter, (Hendrick Backer Master) Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe of
the said Ryley and Companie./

Rp.

jus.

Hendrick Backer of Enckhuysen in Holland
Mariner Master of the said shipp the Saint Peter
aged 63. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith, the said shipp or Herring busse belongeth
to the Port of Enckhuysen in Holland, where shee was built, and saith that
this rendent and John Louson  a Merchant of Enckhuysen are the Owners
thereof/

To the second he saith, hee this rendent hath 1/16 part in the said shipp and the
said Merchant the rest from whom this deponent bought his part for 300 gilders

To the third hee saith hee this rendent and all his said shipps Companie were
and are Hollanders and Subjects of the States of the United Netherlands.

To the 4th hee saith, the said Owners have lived from their infancie at
Enckhuysen aforesaid, and were and are Subjects of the States aforesaid

To the 5th hee saith, his said shipps lading consisteth of Sparrs and
deales laden aboard her at Oudenell in Norway by this rendent for thee
Owners proper accompt to be transported to and delivered at Enckhuysen.

To the 6th hee saith there were no bills of lading signed for the said goods.

To the 7th hee saith hee never was in france, And otherwise referreth to
his foregoeing deposition:/

To the 8 and 9th hee saith hee had Holland Colours aboard at the time the said shipp
was seized upon the open sea by Captaine Welch. And otherwise
cannot depose, saving his voyage was to end at Enckhuysen:-/:

To the 10th hee saith hee was not fraighted by Charterpartie upon the voyage in
question, but undertooke it according to agreement between him and his said
fellow Owners:/

henderÿch Backer [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

Rp.

2us./

Abraham Arentson of Enckhuysen in Holland
Mariner aged 25 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet:/

To the first second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth, That
[?XX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.394r Annotate
this deponent was one of the ordinary seamen belonging to the said shipp the Herring
busse at the time of her seizure, and that shee belongeth to the Port of Euckhuysen
in Holland, to one John Lonson a Merchant there and to the [?Merchants] thereof his precontests
who are inhabitants of Euckhuysen and Subjects of the States of the United Nether
lands, and saith that hee this deponent and all the rest of the said shipps Companie
were and are Hollanders and Subjects to the States aforesaid./

To the 4.th hee saith, the said Owners have dwelt at Euckhuysen for ten yeares last
past of this deponents certaine knowledge./.

To the 5.th hee saith the said shipp is laden with sparrs and deales yaken in at
[?Pudewell] in Norwar, and bound for Euckhuysen./

To the 6.th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 7. hee saith hee hath from his infancie lived and frequented in Holland
and hath bin  severall voyages in ffrance./

To the 8.th hee saith hee ws hired at Euckhuysen upon a voyage from thence
for Norway, and to returne to Euckhuysen, where the said Master was to
pay him 35. gilders for the Voyage./

To the 9:th hee saith the said shipp was taken upon the open sea neare Schagen
by Captaine Welsh, and had hollands Colours aboard at the time of the seizure
And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 10:th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

the marke of
Abraham [MARKE] Arentson:-/
----
The same day
Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories./

3

Frans Neelson of Enchuysen in Holland Mariner
aged 35. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined./

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th Interrogatories hee saith hee well knoweth the shipp
or Herring busse interrate (Hendrick Backer Master) and was an orde
nary seaman aboard her when shee was taken, and saith shee belongeth to the
Port of Enckhuysen in Holland where shee was built, and that the Owners
thereof are Hollanders and Subjects of the States of the United Netherlands
and that they have lived at Enchuysen for many yeares last last, And saith
hee this rendent and all the shipps Companie are  also Hollanders and
Subjects of the States aforesaid/

To the 5. hee saith, That the said shipp is laden with sparrs and deales taken
in at Oudewall in Norwegen, and bound from thence to Euckhuysen./

To the 6. hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

To the 7. hee saith hee hath frequented in severall places of Holland since his
ingancie, and hath bin two voyages in ffrance.

To the 8:th hee saith hee was hired by the said Master at Euckhuysen for a voyage
from thence to Norway and thence to returne to Euckhuysen, where hee was to
have 35. gilders of the said Master for the Voyage:/

(To the 9.th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.394v Annotate
To the 9th hee saith, there were Hollands Colours aboad the said shipp
when shee was seized upon the open sea neare Schagen. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 10th hee saith hee knoweth nothing thereof./

the marke of
ffrancis [MARKE] [?Neelsen] [MARKE, RH SIDE]

[REST OF MANUSCRIPT PAGE IS BLANK IN ORIGINAL]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.395r Annotate
[EMPTY MANUSCRIPT PAGE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.395v Annotate
[EMPTY MANUSCRIPT PAGE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.396r Annotate
M.M.M. M.M.M.

The 25th day of November 1653/

Pope Burges and Hooton against)
Orton touching a hoy called the)
Content of London Clements Smith)
d Clements)

Examined on an allegation on behalfe of the sayd Pope
Burges and Hooton./

1

Frances Brewet of South Bamfleete in the County
of Essex Mariner aged 42 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth

To the first article of the sayd Allegation hee saith and deposeth That during 
the monethes of September and October arlate the arlate Robert Orton hath bin and is Comonly reputed
true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor of one fowerth parte of the hoye or
vessell the Content of London arlate, and of her tackle apparrell and furniture
and that the arlate William Pope Thomas Burges and Thomas Hooton during
the same tyme were and still are comonly reputed true and lawfull Owners of the other three
Quarter parts of the sayd hoy or vessell her tackle apparrell and
furniture, and this deponent hath heard the sayd Orton say and acknowledge that
the sayd Pope Burges and Hooton were and are lawfull owners of three quarter
parts of the sayd hoye and her tackle apparrell And furniture And further
hee cannot depose./

To the second third and 4th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith hee
knoweth nothing of the contents of them and therefore cannot depose unto them./

To the 5th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth that
about the latter end of August or beginning of September last past (the tyme
more certainely hee doth not now remember) the foresayd Orton did
constitute and appointe this deponent Master of the sayd hoye the Content
of London and this deponent about that tyme entered upon and came on board the sayd hoy
as master thereof by the appointment of the sayd Orton, and saith that
at such tyme as this deponent first came on board the sayd hoye and before
ever hee this deponent went any voyage with her hee found that the sayd hoye was
much damnified by reason the same had not bin kept cleane but
was perished and hurt by durt and rotten bavins and that by reason thereof shee
was not then in fitt condition and capacity to carry a ladeing of Corne or
any such merchandizeing commoditie, wherby this deponent beleeveth
that the foresayd Owners of the sayd hoye were and could not choose but bee much
preiudiced the premisses hee deposeth for the reasons aforesayd being
Master as aforesayd and helpeing to clense the same of the sayd durt and rotten bavins and further hee cannot to this
article depose./

To the 6th hee cannot depose./

To the 7th article of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth That
hee this deponent for these three monthes last past and upwards by the
sayd Ortons appointment hath bin Master of the sayd hoye the Content, and
hath gone within the sayd tyme fower voyages in her as Master of her
during all which voyages the sayd Orton was not in her nor did
goe master thereof And further to this article  hee cannot depose./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.396v Annotate
To the 8th article hee saith that hee this deponent for these three moneths
last past hath by the appointment of the sayd Orton imployed the hoy
arlate and hath made as is predeposed 4 voyages in her for one of which
voyages the sayd Orton received eighteene shillings and allowed unto this
deponent sixe shilling sthereof And further hee cannot depose the money
for the other three voyages being as hee beleeveth not yet receaved of the Commonwealths officers for
whome the sayd voiages were undertaken and donne./

To the 9th article of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee well knoweth that upon thursday the third day of this instant
November one James Giles an officer belonging and imployed
by the Court of Admiralty to execute warrants did in the presence of this
deponent and on board the sayd hoye the Constant aforesayd, serve a warrant
upon the arlate Orton which warrant the sayd Gyles read in the presence and
hearing of this deponent, and hee this deponent well remembreth that the effect
of the sayd warrant was to arrest the sayd Orton and his fowerth part
of the sayd hoye And alsoe saith that the next day videlicet on ffriday the
4th of the sayd moneth the sayd Gyles came to this deponent and told him that hee had
from the sayd Orton a warrant procured by him out of the
Admiralty Court to release the sayd hoy from the Arrest predeposed
of, and read the same to this deponent but the particulers of the sayd Release
and the suggestions whereupon the same was grounded and procured hee
remembreth not, but for more certainety thereof referreth himselfe
to the Registry of the sayd High Court of Admiralty and to the sayd
Release procured out of the same, but saith hee well knoweth that the
sayd hoy the Content was not (at the tyme of the sayd release [?XXXXX]
on this deponent) in the service of this Commonwealth, nor [?pressed]
for any service thereof but was cleere from the same, and saith that
on the third day of November about an hower or two after the sayd
Orton was arrested in manner predeposed by the sayd Gyles, And
this deponent also saith that after the sayd hoye was soe [?cleered]
of the service of this Commonwealth and before the
release of the arrest aforesayd was served upon this deponent hee
was offered and could have had fower pounds sterling for freight to goe with the sayd hoye on a voyage
to Rochester but the sayd Orton having procured the sayd release

[ADD DATA]

sayd voyage to Rochester and ws forced to goe with his sayd hoy to the [?XXXX] [?XXX]
there to take in such goods as should be laded on board
after the service of this Commonealth And further to this article hee
cannot depose./

To the last article hee saith his foregoeing depositions are true/

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the first Interrogatory hee saith hee cometh to be a witnesse in this
cause

Smith
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.397r Annotate
cause being requested by the producents to testifie the truth therein and hath
noe share or interest therein And otherwise negatively/

To the second hee saith hee hath bin promised by Pope and Horton two
of the producents that hee sall goe Master of the Content Interrogate and that hee
shall have such satisfaction for soe doeing as is fitt but saith hee for his part
valueth not the imployment And otherwise negatively./

To the third hee saith that saving his foregoeing depositions to which hee
referreth hee cannot depose/

To the 4th and 5th Interrogatories hee saith it concerneth him not to answere to them
for that hee hath not deposed to the articles Interrate/

To the 6th hee saith that hee this deponent did see the dust and rotten
bavins by him predeposed of in the hoye the Contente at his first comin aboard
her, and hee this deponent and a boy of the sayd Ortons did
clense the sayd Hoye of the sayd durte and rotten bavins and threw them over board
but saith that they were soe rotten by reason thereof salne into soe many peeces that he
cannot depose to the number of them, and who put them aboard or how long
they were there hee knoweth not, for that hee found them there in that rotten
condisiton at his first comeing And further saving his foregoeing
depositions to which hee referreth hee cannot depose./

To the 7th Interrogatory hee saith it concerneth him not to answere thereto for the
he hath not deposed to the article Interrate./

To the 8th Interrogatorie hee saith the first of the voyages by him predeposed
was with a ladeing of pease from Limehouse to Tower Wharfe London for
the service of this Common wealth the second was for the service of the
sayd Commonwealth to bring ammunition from Woolwich to the Tower
the third voyage also was for the service of the sayd Commonwealth to fecth
ammunition from aboard divers shipps at Deptford, and on this side us. to bring the
same to the Tower aforesayd, and the fowerth voyage was likewise for the service
of this Commonwealth to fetch Amunition from aboard the Gilliflower
lying at Woollwich and to be delivered to the Tower aforesayd, which ladeing
is yet in the hoye lying neere Tower wharfe undelivered, and saith for the first
voyage the sayd Orton receaved 18 shillings as is predeposed, and what the
other three voyages will amount to hee knoweth not for that the bills for receaving
pay for the same of the Officers of this Comonwealth in that behalfe
imployed are not yet signed and further saving his forefoeing depositions
to which hee referreth hee cannot depose.

To the 9th hee saith he beleeveth the hoye or vessell Interrogate to be about
4 or 5 and twenty tonnes And further saving his foregoeing depositions
to which hee referreth hee cannot depose

To the tenth hee saith that saving his foregoeing depositions to which
hee referreth hee cannot depose/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.397v Annotate
To the last videlicet the 11th hee saith that the hoye Interrate was not in the
service of the State at the tyme by him predeposed, for that hee being then
aboard had cleered her of all lading which shee had aboard
for the service of this Commonwealth, and had noe order then to [?attend] any
further service. And further saving his foregoeing depositions to
which hee referreth hee cannot depose/

the marke of the sayd
ffrancis [MARKE] Brewell

Repeated before doctor Clarke and doctor Godolphin
----
The second of December 1653./

Jesson against Read and Wilson for their interest)
in the Golden Lyon Smith Budd)

Esamined  upon an allegation arlate on the
behalfe of the sayd Read and Wilson./

4us

Titus Waimouth of Stepney in the County of
Middlesex Boatswaine of the Seaven Sisters whereof
the sayd Abraham Read is Captaine aged thirty yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that the arlate shipp the Golden Lyon was seized and taken in James River in
Virginia being a River that ebbeth and floweth and neere a place there called
Pagan Creeke within the dominion of the Commonwealth of England
in the moneth of ffebruary 1652 and upon a Wednesday or Thursday
in the morning after the Sonne riseing this hee knoweth being boatswaine
of the Shipp the Seaven Sisters and within sight of the Golden Lyon
when shee was seized and further saving his subsequent deposition to
which hee referreth hee cannot depose./

To the third and 4th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth that
hee knoweth that the arlate Abraham Read Commander of the shipp
7 Sisters had a Commission grannted unto him by authority of the Common=
wealth of England to seize all shipps and goods aboard them which they
shoulde finde tradeing aor to have traded at Virginia and this hee knoweth for
that hee hath seene the sayd Commission and heard the same read and
this deponent beleeveth and hath heard the arlate Captaines [?Nathan]
Jesson and Thomas Wilson had the like Commissions grannted to them And
saith that the sayd Captaines with their three shipps the
William and John (the sayd Jesson Commander) the 7 Sisters (The sayd [?XXX] Commander
and the Charles (the sayd Thomas Wilson Comander) arriving att [?length]
in safety at Virginia and saith that after such their arrivall there and about a day before
the seizure of the sayd shipp the Golden Lyon this deponent heard the sayd
Captaine Jesson being then on board the 7 Sisters saye unto the sayd [?Captaine]
Reade well Captaine Reade what soever shipp [?XXXX] I take with any of my
Company you shall have an equall share in the, , and whatsoever
shippe or goods are taken by you or your shipps Company I expect [?alsoe]
and equall share thereof, and the sayd Captaine Reade
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.398r Annotate
replyed and sayd yea or yes with all my harte or to the like effecte And
further hee cannot depose./

To the 5th and 6th and 7th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that before the seizure of the Golden Lyon arlate the sayd three  Captaines Jesson
Read and Wilson had all notice where the Golden Lyon lay and did agree to endeavour
the surprizall of her and to that purpose with their three shipps met togeather
on the Tuesday towards night [?next] before the [?sezure] of the Golden Lyon in a place
in James River within sight of the sayd shipp Golden Lyon and
the sayd Captaine Jesson
having privately sent away some of his shipps company in the night
tyme in a boate towards the Golden Lyon to endeavour the surprizall of her
without the knowledge of the other two Captaines and their Companyes (as this
deponent beleeveth) on the Wednesday morning
the sayd three Captaines Jesson Read and Wilson with their three shipps the William
and John the 7 Sisters and the Charles weighed Anchor and made foreward
towards the Golden Lyon with intente to surprize her continueing allwaies
in sight of her but the winde and tyde not serving to get up soe farr
as the Golden Lyon laye, they all came againe to Anchor within
sight of the Golden Lyon untill the Thursday morning, and then weighed
Anchor againe with intente still to goe forward and surprize the sayd shipp
Golden Lyon, and as they were in their course towards her and about three
myles distant from her and within sight of her some of the sayd Captaine
Jessons men came in a wherry and brought word that the sayd shipp
the Golden Lyon had submitted And further saving his subsequent
depositions hee cannot depose./

To the 8th and 9th articles...

To the 10th 11th and 12th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee well knoweth that the shipp the Golden Lyon is above two
hundred tonnes and had some divers musketts pikes swords and other armes and ammunition on board her after her seizure which hee hath seene [?XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] and hath heard
some of the sayd Jessons men who seized her confesse and saye that they had
not above 11 or twelve men at the most of their Company when they seized
her and that the sayd Golden Lyon had then on board her fifteene men, And hee
this deponent is verily persuaded in his conscience and doth really beleeve
that the Company of the Golden Lyon, (being soe well provided of weapons and
all
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.398v Annotate
all necessaries for defence, as after the seizure it appeared to this
deponent they were) were very well able to have mastered the arlate
Captaine Jessons boats company who seized her, and that they would not
have submitted to them, had they not seene the sayd three shipps making up towards them and ready to assiste in cae they had made
resistance And further hee cannot depose/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.399r Annotate
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd allegation./.

5us

Richard Tucker of Lymehouse in the parish of Stepney
and County of Middlesex Mariner carpenter of the shipp the Seaven
Sisters whereof Abraham Read is Captaine) aged 30 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth
as followeth videlicet./

To the first and second articles of the sayd allegation hee saith that the shipp
the Golden Lyon arlate was seized in a River in Virginia which ebbeth and floweth
called James River and neere Pagan Creeke there and within the dominion of
the Commonwealth of England but on what day of the weeke hee remembreth
not and further saving his subsequent depositions hee cannot depose

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.400r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 14th of DEcember 1653./ [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of Thomas ffincham Edward Yonge and)
ffrancis Yonge of London Merchants for ffrench wyne)
seized in the shipp the ffortune of which David Beck)
is Master seized by Gyles Pladffeild upon colour of)
a Commission granted to John DElabarr and others: Suckley)
Smith)

Examined upon an allegation given in on the
behafe of the sayd Claymers./

Rp. EA:

1

Robert Minchard of the parish of Saint
Magnus London Notary publique aged 62
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first article of the sayd allegation and schedule therein mentioned hee saith and deposeth That in
the moneth of September last the arlate Thomas ffincham Edward Yonge
and ffrancis Yonge did hyre the shipp the ffortune arlate (the sarlate david Beck of Hamborough Master thereof) to freight from London for a voyage
to lade wynes at Rochell or Sherrant in ffrance for the accompte of them
the sayd ffincham and Edward and ffrancis Yonge and to retourbe therewith
either to Dunquirke or London according as the sayd
Beck should receive orders from the sayd ffreighters in the downes arlate
where hee was by Charperpartie made in writing under hand and seale betweene
the sayd ffreighters and the sayd Beck appointed to stay and take orders and
directiopn from them, to which of the sayd Ports hee should returne to deliver
and unlade the sayd wines and accordingly on the second day of September
1652 a Charterparty Indented betweene the sayd ffreighters and the sayd Beck was
made in writing and then Interchangeably signed sealed and delivered by them
each to other as their severall deedes, for the performance of the sayd voyage
accordingly And saith tht the schedule arlate now shewed unto him at this his examination was and is the originall Charterparty
made signed and sealed by the sayd david Beck on his parte ato the sayd ffreighters for
the sayd voyage in the presence of this deponent and his this deponents sonne henry
Micnchard and the rest of the witnesses whose names are thereunto subscribed The
premisses hee the better knoweth being the person imployed by the sayd ffreighters
and the sayd david beck to drawe and make the sayd Charterpartie, and
well knoweth that these words Robert Minchard Notary publique London
are his this deponents owne hand writing and did see all the rest of the witnesses
thereto subscribe their names in testimony of the truth thereof And further
to this article hee cannot depose

To the second third fowerth 5th and 6th articles hee saith hee cannot depose knowing
nothing concerning the transactions of the sayd voyage more then is by him predeposed
to which hee referreth/
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.400v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 15th day of december 1653/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Exanmined upon the sayd allegation./

Rp.

2

John Leemkuele of London Merchant aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first article and schedule therein mentioned  hee saith and deposeth that in the Moneth of September
1653 the arlate Edward Yonge Thomas ffincham and ffrancis Yonge did
hyre to ffreight the shipp the ffortune
of hamborough whereof david Beck arlate was and is Master then lying
in the River of Thames to goe from the Port of London arlate to Rohan
or Sherrant in ffrance and there lade wines for their Accompts and returne
therewith into the Downes and there to receive order from the sayd [?XXX]
to which of the Ports arlate of London or Dunquirke hee should
returne and unlade the same ladeing of wynes, And accordingly
a Charterparty was made signed and sealed interchangeably [?between]
the sayd ffreighters and Master for the sayd voyage in the presence of
this deponent John houlding Robert Michand and henry Minchand And
hee this deponent well knoweth the schedule arlate now showed unto
him at the tyme of his examination to be the originall Charterparty
([?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.401r Annotate
signed and sealed by the sayd david Beck on his part to the sayd
ffreighters for the sayd voyage, and knoweth the name John Lemkuell
at the bottom of the sayd schedule to be his this deponents owne hand writing
and sawe the other witnesses thereto subscribed, sett their hands to the same
And hee this deponent hath the Counterpart of the sayd schedule or
Charterpartie signed and sealed at the same tyme, and in this deponents and the
forenamed witnesses presence, by the sayd ffreighters to the sayd David Beck for
the same voyage in this deponents custodie, where it hath remayned ever
since the signeing and sealing thereof And further to this article hee
cannot depose saving his subsequent depositions./

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.401v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

3us.

John Such of the parish of Saint Dunstan in the East
London Wyne Cooper aged 39 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.403r Annotate
The 16th day of December 1653/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

Rp.

4us.

John Holding of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Merchant aged 50 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet./

To the first article of the sayd allegation and the schedule
therein mentioned hee saith and deposeth that hee this deponent was by the arlate
David Beck imployed in the moneth of September last to procure him a freight
which hee accordingly did videlicet the ffreight arlate, and thereby well knoweth
that in the sayd moneth of September 163 the arlate Edward Yonge ffrancis
yoinge and Thomas ffincham did by this deponents meanes and procurement
hyre to freight the shipp the ffortune of Hamborough arlate for a voyage
from the Port of London to Rochell or Sherrent in ffrance there to
lade wines for the Accompt of the sayd ffreighters and returne therewith
to the Downes arlate where hee the sayd David Beck was with his
sayd lading to stay and there receive orders from the saud ffreighters
at which Port whether at London or Dunquirke hee should unlade
and deliver the sayd wynes And saith that according to the sayd
agreement betweene the sayd Beck and the sayd ffreighters a Charterparty
was drawne up betweene them to the effect aforesayd by this deponents
contest Robert Minchard, and upon the second day of the sayd moneth
of September last the sayd Charterparty was interchangeably signed
sealed and delivered by the sayd Beck and the sayd ffreighters videlicet
the sayd Beck to one counterpart thereof and the ffreighters to the
other part thereof in the presence of this deponent and his precontests John
Leemkuell and Robert Minchard, and his sonne Henry Minchard who
all subscribed thereto as witnesses thereof And he saith that having
seriously perused the schedule arlate now shewed to him at the tyme
of this his examination hee well knoweth the sayd schedule to be the 
same and the originall Charterpartie videlicet that parte thereof which was soe
signed sealed and delivered as aforesayd by the sayd David Beck And
further to this article hee cannot depose./

To the 2: 3: 4th 5th and 6th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith hee cannot
depose not being imployed to goe in the sayd voyage nor knowing the
arlate Samuell Berryman./

To the 7th hee saith his foregoeing depositions are true

To the 8th article of the sayd allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee well
knoweth and remembreth that after the hyreing of the shipp the ffortune aforesayd
by the sayd ffreighters arlate they the sayd ffreighters ffincham and the two
Mr Yongs aforesayd did desyre to knowe the names of the Owners
of the sayd shipp who lived at Hamorowe, and declared that they the sayd
ffreighters intended to make use of some of the Owners of the sayd shipps names
and to cause bills of ladeing to be made for the owners they intended to
lade aboard the sayd shipp in the names of some of the Owners and to cause
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.403v Annotate
the sayd wynes to be marked with the letters of the sayd Owners names
for the better securing the sayd wynes from seizure by ffrench or dutch men of warr
whereupon the sayd ffreighters were told and made acquainted with the
names of three of the Owners of the sayd Shipp all Hamburgers videlicet
the arlate Paule Paulson William Greison and Henry Calmes and that the sayd
Owners did usuall each of them use to marke their goods with the letters of their names
videlicet 'PP:' 'WG' and 'HC' and further to this article hee cannot depose not being
acquainted with what order the sayd ffreighters sent to their ffactor
or what was done in order to the securing the sayd wines./

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first Interrogatory hee answereth that hee this deponent did by direction
of David Beck the Master of the sayd shipp the ffortune make
insurance for him the sayd Beck to the value of sixty pounds sterling but whether the same  be of
or for any parte of the goods now in question hee this deponent knoweth
not, And to the rest of the Interrogatory hee answereth negatively./

To the 2 Interrogatory hee saith hee hath satisfied the contents thereof in his
foregoeing depositions soe farr as hee can and saving his sayd depositions
hee cannot further depose saving that hee saith the Charterparty
predeposed of was soe done as aforesayd and was reall and [?XXXX]
not colourable./

To the third 4th and 5th Interrogatories hee answereth that hee was not in ffrance
at the tyme Interrogated nor sawe the wines Interrogated brought or paid for nor
sawe the sayd ffincham and Yongs pay any moneys for the same nor
knoweth the sayd Samuell Berryman nor how longe hee hath lived
in ffrance nor sawe the sayd ffincham and Yongs give any order to the
effect Interrogated nor soe sawe any letters from the saud Berryman And further
to this Interrogatory hee cannot depose./

To the 6th Interrogatory saving his foregoeing depositions to which hee referreth
hee cannot depose

John Houlding [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation./

Rp.

5

William Coxe of the parish of Saint Mary Woolnoth
Wyne Cooper aged 40 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation hee saith and depsoeth The
arlate Edward Yonge ffrancis Yonge and Thomas ffincham did in the presence
and hearing of this deponent about the beginning of September last 1653 hyre [?for]
ffreight of the arlate Daniel Beck the Master thereof the shipp the ffortune
to goe from the Port of London to Rochell or Sherrant in ffrance there to [?lade]
wynes for the Accompts of the sayd ffreighters and returne therewith
to the Downes arlate and there stay and expect orders from the sayd ffreighters
whether hee should goe with his sayd shipp and her ladeing of wynes
to [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.405r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The 10th day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Lord Protector of the Common Wealth of)
England Scotland and Ireland et certera against)
the shipp called the Charity brought into)
Portsmouth and her tackle and furniture with)
whatsoever wines, goods wares and Merchandizes)
in her taken and seized by certaine ships)
in the ymediate service of this Commonwealth.)
and against all et cetera. Bud.)

Examined upon the Allegation given on the behalfe
of his highnessse the Lord Protector et cetera

Rowe

jus.

Mathew Pock of Portsmouth in
the County of Southampton Gentleman
aged 32 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
Examined deposeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.405v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 12th day of January 1654

Toubching the ship the Providence of Plymouth)
whereof John Sibley is Commannder and the goods on)
bord her bound from Mallega for London)

Rp.

John Sibly of Plymouth in the County
of Devon Master of the ship the Providence aged
45 yeares or thereabouts, John Hooper Carpenter
and Thomas Perryman Gunner of the same ship and John Hendy of Antony in Cornewall mariner
a foremastman in the same Ship doe ioyntly and severally
make oath in the high Court of the Admiralty of England before the
right worshipfull William Clarke and John Godolphin two of the Judges
of the said Court as followeth. Videlicet The said John Sibley [?XXX]

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.406r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

John Sibley [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
John hooper [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Thomas vreyman [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
John hendy [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court before Dr Clerke and doctor Godolphin.
----
The 12th day of January 1653

Examined upon the Allegation given on the behalfe of the sayd Levers

Daniel Lever and Companie imployers of the)
Ship the Bonadventure whereof John Greeneleafe)
is Captaine against the ship the Patienece)
whereof Heitman Laderein is master and)
her lading. Smith)

ius.

Rp.

Roger Knights of the parishe of
of Saint Saviour within the Burrough of
Southwarke marriner aged 26. yeares
or thereabouts sworne and Examined deposeth

To the first and second articles of the Allegation in this cause given and admitted
hee saith and deposeth. That the shippe the Bonadventure whereof
this deponent was and is Boatswaine being within the tyme allegate sett
out to Sea upon a private man of Warre voyage and designe by vertue
of a Commission or Letter of Marque under the Great Seale of this Court by
and at the charge and eexpense of the producent Samuell Sever and Company
under the Commannd of the arlate John Greeneleiffe as Captaine thereof
for the taking and seizing of the ships and goods of the States of the United
Netherland Provinces or theire Subiects and of the ffrench king and his
Subiects and others the Enemies of this Commonwealth) did in or about
the latter end of the month of November last past by vertue of and
with the said Commission on board upon the high and open Seas meete with
surprize and take a certaine ship called the Patience whereof the arlate
Heitman Ludekins was Commander and her ladeing consisting
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.407r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sqaid Allegation.

2dus

Christopher Frazir of Dover in the County of Kent mariner
aged 22 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined deposeth.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.408r Annotate
The 22th day of January 1653.

The Clayme of John donvestion)
of Venice and James Thery)
for sixty fourt Carratalls of)
oyle in the shipp the Saint Marke)
whereof Dirrick Jausson Mars)
is Master taken by the Parliaments)
ffleet under the Command of)
Generall Blake Smith Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers.

Smith dt.

Thomas Cole of the parish of Saint Olaves
in Southwarke Citizen and Weaver of London
aged 73 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet:

T the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he hath well
knowne the arlate James Therry, who att present is residing att
Antwerpe, from the Childhood of him the sayd James, And saith that the
sayd James Therry was and is an Englishman borne and a subiect
of this Commonwealth which this deponent knoweth for that he this
deponent was a Journeyman or servant under the father of the
sayd James within the tyme of the Childhood of him the sayd James and the sayd father of the arlate James was a freeman
of this Citty and of the livery of the Company of Weavers, and
the sayd James was borne in Colemanstreet within this Citty
of London where his father lived many yeares both before and
after the birth of him the sayd James who was educated and bred likewise in this Citty And for an Englishman
so borne and bredd the sayd James Therry was and is commonly
accounted reputed and taken, And otherwise he cannot depose
upon the rest he is not examined by direction

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes.

To the .1. negatively.

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd James Therry from his
Childhood being about 50 yeares. And saith that the sayd James Therry
when he went out of England went to live as this deponent hath
heard att Amsterdam, but how long e lived there or whether he had
a wife and family there knoweth not. And saith that about four
or five yeares agoe the tyme otherwise he remembreth not, there
came to this deponents howse one ffountaine a post that used to travell
betwixt England and Holland and this deponent falling into discourse
wit him concerning his acquaintance in Holland, amongst the rest made
enquiry after the sayd James Therry. and the sayd ffountaine did
then acquaint this Rendent that the sayd James Therry was removed
from Amsterdam and was gone to live and did then live att Anstwerpe
and att Antwerpe the sayd Therry hath resided ever since
that tyme as this deponent hath heard, but whether as a merchant
stranger or as a Burgher This Rendent for his part doth not know
nor hath heard And further he cannot depose.

To the .3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12th Interrogatoryes he saith he is now way
privy to this cause or any thing therein deduced saving as a foresayd, and
otherwise than negatively, saving as aforesayd canot depose to the sayd Interrogatoryes
nor any of them.

Tho [?CoXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.408v Annotate
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Mathew Dentier of the parish of Saint ffaith London
Cotizen and Weaver of the sayd Citty aged 58 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

[ADD DATA]

Mathew Dentier [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The 28th day of January [?1651]

Henry Hazard and Company Imployers of the shipp)
the Speedewell whereof Peter Wrozall is Captaine)
against the Master and Company of the shipp the Hope)
alias the Hopewell alias the Portugall prize alias the)
New Amsterdam.

Examined upon certaine Interroga=
tories given in on the parte
of the sayd Henry Hazard and
Company./

Rp EA.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.409r Annotate
Christopher Wallis of Plymouth in the County of
Devon Mariner Master of the shipp the Hope alias Hopewell
alias the Portugall Prize alias the New Amsterdam aforesayd
aged 33 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.410r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the last Interrogatory hee saith hee hath satisfied the conmtents thereof
in his foregoeing deposition asoe farr as hee cann to which hee
therefore referreth and further cannot depose

Christopher Wallis [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges
in Court

[REMAINDER OF MANUSCRIPT PAGE IS BLANK]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.410v Annotate
[EMPTY MANUSCRIPT PAGE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.411r Annotate
NNN

The 17th day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Dider ffouqualt)
of London for the shipp the Hope)
whereof Oliver Gwyn was master)
and her lading on board her taken)
by some of the Parliaments shipps)
Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Dider ffouquat

pd

1

David Griel of Saint Martins Lane London
merchant aged 25 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or about
the month of July last 1653. the arlate vessell the Hope Oliver
Gwyn master arrived safely att this Port of London from the Port of
Rohan in ffrance laden with ffrench wynes for the use and Accompt
of the Prince of Condaes Agent Monsieur Barriere here
Resident and the sayd Didier ffauquot, which he this deponent knoweth
to be true for that being here then resident and imployed by the
sayd Monsieur Barriere and sayd ffaulquat for that purpose he saw the sayd wynes
safely delivered out of the sayd shipp in this Port for the use
and accompt of them the sayd Monsieur Barriere and ffoyquat
And otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after
such tyme as the sayd shipp the Hope had here delivered her sayd
lading of wynes as aforesayd He this deponent by vertue of a
Commission or letter of Attorney of the sayd Didier ffaweret made by
him to this deponent in that behalfe, and with the proper moneyes of
him the sayd ffanewuall and for his use did here att London buy and
afterwards for his accompt lade aboard the sayd shipp the goods
and merchandizes now Claymed that is to say 25 Casks of Allom
1- pipes of sugar .17 barells of starch and some other things all to
be carryed and transported from hence to Roane and there to bee
delivered to Nicholas Gisling of Roane the ffactor of the sayd Didier
ffawquat to and for the use and advantage of him the sayd Didier
ffawquat, ffor which reasons this deponent knoweth that the sayd Didier
ffawquat att the tyme of the lading of the sayd goods and continually since
was and att this present is and ought to be the rtue and lawfull
Owner and Proprietor of the sayd goods, and for and as such Commonly
accounted reputed and taken. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
goods being so laden att this Port the sayd shipp sett sayle therewith
for Roane and was in her Course taken by an Ostend man of warr
and together with her lading carryed into Ostend. And saith
that the sayd Didier ffawcot did send over him this deponent to Ostend to
seeke fore restitution of the sayd shipp and goods, and that he this deponent
did safely arrive att Ostend, and there found the sayd shipp and goods, and
there by the order and for the use of the sayd ffawcout and with the Consent
of the Commissioners of the Admiralty of Bridges did contract for and buy the
sayd shipp and her lading of the Imployers of the sayd Ostend man of
warr for the summe or value of 320 li sterling, which moneye was really
payd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.411v Annotate
payd here in London in manner hereafter to the Assignes and for the use of the sayd Imployers
of the sayd ostend shipp of warr by mr Michael Castile of London merchant
upon whom two bills of exchange were drawne in that behalfe, and saith
the money was so payd by the hands of this deponents
to the sayd Assignes And saith that for
and after the sayd Contract and payment of the sayd moneyes the sayd Didier
ffawcault was and att this present is the true and lawfull owner and
Imployer of the sayd shipp and her lading now on board her and for and
as such accounted whiich he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation he saith that after the sayd shipp was with
her lading so bought by this deponent att Ostend as aforesayd sheesett
sayle from thence and as this deponent by letters of advise from the
sayd Oliver Gain is informed, in her Course for Rohan  meeting with foule
weather was forced into Callice, and that being againe upon her Course
from Callice to Rohan was taken by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth
and carryed into Dover. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation he saith the sayd Didier ffauquot did p[?ay]
the arlate mr Michael Castaele of London merchant to give him a
letter of Credit to Ostend for such moneyes as should be requisit to redeeme the sayd ship and goods which letter was by this deponent carryed to
ostend and delivered to Anthony Domician there the factor or Correspondent
of the sayd Mr Castaeole; which Dominician drew the foresayd bills for 320 li
upon the sayd Michael Castaele, and the sayd Michael Castaele did accept
the sayd bills, and by the hands of this deponent pay the sayd moneyes to the Assignes of the sayd
Imployers for whose use the sayd bills were drawne, and saith the
money videlicet 320 li so payd by the sayd Castaele was really payd for the
sayd shipp and lading, and was really and truly the moneyes of him
the sayd Didier ffaqual, which he knoweth for that he this deponent
did receyve the same of the sayd ffauqot and in satisfaction of the
sayd bills and in the name and behalfe of the sayd Castael upon whom
the same were drawne payd the same to the Assignes of the sayd Imployers
here in London. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the schedule to
the sayd allegation annexed and now shewne to him this Examinat was and is
the true Copie of the Originall sale or Agreement made
of the sayd shipp and goods, and this deponent did receyve the same
from the hands of one of the Actuaries of the Admiralty Court of
Bridges as and for a true Copie. And saith that albeit the sayd sale
were made to this deponent in his owne name yet the same was so
done by vertue of the sayd Commission or Letter of Attorney made by
the sayd ffawcault to this deponent as aforesayd, and because the sayd
ffawcat was not the present, And saith that in reality and truth the
same was so done for the sole use and accompt of the sayd Didier ffaw[?quot]
and he did really pay the money for the same in manner as aforesayd
which he knoweth being privy to all the sayd passages and further cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.412r Annotate
To the eighth article of the sayd allegation he saith the sayd didier ffawcot was and
is a subiect of this Commonwealth, and hath lived in London of this deponents
certaine knowledge four yeares and upwards, and by report 30 yeares
and upwards, and was and is a free denison of England and
for, and as such commonly accounted reputed and taken. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 9th article he saith that the foresayd Oliver Groyn the master of the sayd
shipp the hope did give to this deponent his free consent to and for the
buying of the sayd shipp for the use and accompt of the producent, and did
expressely renounce all his Interest in the same and declared that
he had no money to buy or pay for the same, and desired this deponent
to buy the same. And further saith that from and since the buying of
the same as aforesayd the sayd Gain nor any other person whatsoever
the sayd ffauquo[?l] onely excepted had or hath any title or Interest in
the sayd shipp or her lading or any part thereof, which he knoweth for
the reasons aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

Row dt.

To the .1. negatively.

To the .2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp ever since July last past
and further saving his foregoeing depositions whereto he referreth
himselfe he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he this deponent did himselfe pay the sayd 320 l sterling
to Mr Luc[?a] Knightly 200 l. and to Mr Odg[X] 120 l. the Assignes of the sayd Imployers of
the Ostend man of warr whose names are mentioned in the sayd bill
of sale. and this deponent was present when the possession of the sayd
shipp was delivered att Ostend and saith it happned in the month of
October last past and the delivery was made to this deponent
himselfe [?who ?accepted] thereof in and on the behalfe and to the
use of the producent only and noe other person whatsoever And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 4th. [ADD TEXT]

To the 5.th [ADD TEXT]

To the .6th [ADD TEXT]

To the .7.th [ADD TEXT]

To the .8.th. Interrogatory he saith that upon the departure of the sayd shipp from
this Port there was [?two] bills of lading delivered by this Rendent to the
sayd Gain which bills for preserving of the sayd goods incase they should
be mett with by ffrench or dutch were made as to the accompt of the goods
therein mentioned in the name of this Rendent. and otherwise he cannot
depose.

D. Griell./ [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.412v Annotate
The 18th of February 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the fore said allegation.

2

Michael Castel of the partish of Saint Olaves hartstreete
London Merchant, aged 66 yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined, saith as followeth.

To the sixth article hee saith and deposeth that the sayd Didier
ffawquot in September last past did earnestly desire this deponent
to furnish him the sayd ffauwcott with a letter of Credit to some of this
deponents freinds or Correspondents att Ostend for such a summe of money
as should be needfull for the redemption of a certaine vessell and
her lading taken in her course from this Port to ffrance by an
Ostende man of warr and by him carryed to Ostend, and this
deponent did accordingly furnish him with a letter of credit which
as he hath heard and beleiveth was sent to Ostend by his precontest
David Griel whom the sayd ffawcot ymployed for the redeemeing
of the sayd shipp and goods. And saith that afterwards this deponent
understood that the sayd Griel with the assistance of Anthony Dominicens
this deponents Correspondent did redeeme  the sayd vessell and goods
for 320 li sterling of and from the Imployers of the sayd Private
man of warr of Ostend. And saith the sayd moneyes were here in
London really payd for the same to the Assignees of the sayd Imployers
of the sayd Mann of warr for their use in manner following that is to say
there were 2 bills of exchange one of 200 li the other of 120 li drawne
upon this deponent for payment of the sayd 200 li to Mr Knightly and Company
and the sayd 120 li to David Odger, all inhabitants of London, which  bills this
deponent did accept and when the same were to be payd sent word to the
sayd Didier ffaucott who with his owne moneyes discharged the sayd
bills and payd the sayd moneyes according to the respective [?assignations]
aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the eighth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd Didier
ffawcot was and is a subiect of this Commonwealth and hath lived oin
England by the space of 30 yeares or thereabouts, and hath bene
well knowne to this deponent 25 yeares and was and is a freeman
of London of the Company of Apothecaryes and a free denizen of England and soe
accounted And otherwise hee cannot depose

Upon the rest he is not examined by direction of the producent.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

[ADD DATA]

To the 5. 5. 6 . 7 and 8th. hee saith he was borne at Canterbury and liveth [?XXXX]
and further otherwise then negatively cannot depose

Michael [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.413r Annotate
NNN

The three and twentyeth day of December 1653

On the  behalfe of John Harrison)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

pd

3)

William Neave of Dukes place London merchant
aged 44 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first and second and third articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he
this deponent was Resident att Riga in the monethes of July and August
1652. and there saw the sayd shipp Ostrich arrive under the Commannd
of the sayd John Harrison who as this deponent then credibly heard had
lately bought the sayd shipp tackle and furniture att Dantzyck from
whence she then immediately came and saith that in the sayd monethes
of July and August the sayd John Harrison did att Riga for
his owne Accompt lade aboard the sayd shipp to be transported to this
Port of London upon his owne Adventure the goods and merchandises
hereafter following to say 68 bundles of hemp weighing 206 ship pounds
English weight 670 lb of the value of about 34 s per C. and 38 atts
of fine Lettousse flax weighing 80 hundred pounds English weight
which this deponent knoweth for that he saw the sayd John Harrison
buy the sayd hempe and flax and saw the same weighed and sent
away out of the warehouses where the same were bought, and saw them
put aboard the sayd shipp all for his the sayd Harrisons owne accompt and knoweth that
he did the tyme aforesayd lade aboard the sayd shipp for his owne accompt
1120 peices of wainscott of the value of 150 li sterling or thereabouts, and 800
four foot boards of the value of 80 li sterling and 1600 of three
foot board, of the value of 96 li sterling. all which this deponent saw
laden the tyme place and for the account aforesayd. and saith the sayd flax
was worth 50 s per C. and knoweth that the sayd Harrison was necessitated
to sell att Copenhagen in Denmarke 52 mattes of flaxe over and above
the foresayd 38 mattes. in the sale whereof he lost 80 [?li] or threabouts, this
deponent being att Copenhagen and seeing the sayd 52 mattes so sold
for providing of victuall and necessaries. for him the sayd Harrison and
shipps Company of Mariners who had likewise severall parcells of goods
laden aboard the sayd shipp the tyme and place aforesayd for their Accompt
but the certaine quantity or value thereof he knoweth not And otherwise
he cannot depose saving that the sayd John Harrison did acquaint this deponent
att Riga the tyme aforesayd that he bought the sayd shipp at Dantzick much
unfitted and in want of furniture, for 8000 guilders;

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation he saith the sayd shipp Ostrich in the sayd
monethes of July and August was a stanch shipp of the burthen of 200
tonnes and upwards. and was worth with her tackle and furniture
having bene newly fitted and equipped the summe of one thousand
pounds sterling in the Judgement of this deponent who beleiveth shee sould then
have yeilded somuch moneyes to have bene sold att this Port of London.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
having taken in the sayd goods sett sayle from Riga and in her Course for
London whither she was bound, putting into Copenhagen
where this deponent saw her sayd Lading on bord her the


HCA 13/68 f.414r Annotate
in the sayd shipp from Riga to this port of London here to be delivered for the
accompt aforesayd. and that he this deponent did assist the sayd Edward  [?Nixon]
att and in the buying of the sayd wainscott Clapboards pipestaves deales
and oares for the accompt aforesayd And that the sayd shipp departed with the sayd
goods towards London and in her Course putt into Copenhagen under the
dominon of the King of denmarke where this deponent saw her with her
sayd goods on board in September 1652 he this deponent being then likewise
there. And saith that in the sayd monethes of July and September the foresayd
shipp was an able staunch and goods shipp and was of the burthen of 300 tonns
or thereabouts having about .14. gunnes and was with her sayd gunnes
tackle and furniture well worth 2000 li sterling in the Judgement of this
deponent who further declareth and deposeth that the sayd shipp with her
lading after her such arrivall
----
The 28th day of December 1653

Examined upon the foresayd allegation

pd

3

John Harrison of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Mariner aged 37 yeares or therabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the sayd allegation and severall articles therein he saith that in the yeares 1652
and 1653, and particularly in July and August 1652 and february 1653 last
past the arlate Thomas Nonner and Company were owners of the sayd shipp the
ffreindshipp of Newcastle Edward Nixon Master and that about the sayd moneth
of July the sayd shipp under commannd of the sayd Nixon arrived at Riga
wherein this deponent then likewise was with his shipp the Ostrich, and saith that
the sayd shipp ffreindshipp riding neere to this deponents there, he saw
severall great quantities of hempe flax and Clapboard and the like goods
ladeb aboard her, and in particular saith that amongst the rest the foreayd
Nixon for accompt of himselfe and owners did in July and August 1652
att Riga lade aboard his sayd shipp severall parcells of flax wainscot and
Clapboard the certaine quantity or value whereof he knoweth not to be in the
sayd shipp and for the sayd accompts transported to London whither his sayd
shipp was then bound, And saith that the sayd shipp ffreindshipp having with the sayd goods
aboard her departed from Riga and in her Course to London putt into &amp;#124;Copenhagen
where this deponent saw the sayd shipp with her sayd goods in her in September
1652. And saith that the sayd shipp ffreindshipp with her lading was in the sayd  moneth of
September deteyned, and in ffebruary next following of the sight of this
deponent in a warlike and hostile manner absolutely[?XX] into the hands of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.414v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

John Harrison [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 28th day of December 1653.

Ad p. r. m.

On the behalfe of John Harrison)
touching the seizure of the Ostrich)
and her lading by the King of)
Denmarke)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

4)

pd

John Harrison of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Master of the sayd shipp the Ostrich, aged 37 yeeres
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth of [?XXX]
1652
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.415v Annotate
To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
by reason of the premisses over and besides the losses of this deponent aforesayd which
amount to three thousand one hundred thirty one pounds sterling
Hee this deponent hath suffered other hreat losses that is to say
the summe of 600 li sterling for the freight of merchants goods
laden aboard the sayd shipp the tyme aforesayd. and 115 li sterling
over and above the moneyes before mentioned spent upon him selfe
and shipps Company att Copenhagen and travelling home for
England. and in losse of ymployment for himselfe and sayd
shipp for 15 monethes att 50 li sterling per moneth the sayd shipp
being well worth 50 li sterling per moneth; the summe of eight hundred
and forty pounds sterling over and besides the value of his [?liberty]
ammd wounding, and losse of improvement of his stock which
he cannot certainly value. And that his sayd Mariners have
besides their sayd former dammages amounting to 184 li. 12 s. sterling
have suffered other dammage in losse of improvement of their stock
and otherwise to a good value the certainty whereof hee cannot sett
forth. And otherwise cannot depose.

John Harrison [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 29th day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers et cetera against the sylver in the)
Crowne Imperiall)

Examined upon the sayd alleagtion

3

Sivart Goodeman of Wismire in Swethland
Mariner Captaine and master of the Sampson
of Wismire aged 38 yeares or thereabouts a
wittnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet

To the sayd allegation and schedule thereto annexed and bills of lading
therein mentioned and now shewne him This deponent saith that being
att Cadiz in October last past with his sayd shipp the Sampson of Wismire
which came from Norwey laden with deales for accompt of
Generall Wrangell Antonio Rhyne Chell and Company all
Swethlanders did there as master and merchant being intrusted
by the sayd Generall Wrangel Antonio Rhyne Chell and Company being
Owners likewise of the said shipp the Sampson for manageing the sayd
shipp and her lading, sell the foresayd deales for three thousand
peices of eight, which he receyved of the merchants att Cadiz that bought
the same. And saith that about the 21th day of the sayd moneth of October
he this deponent did in his owne person lade aboard the arlate shipp
the Crowne Imperiall Hans Meyners skipper then riding att anchor
neere Cadiz part of the sayd moneyes that is to say one thousand peices
of eight in value being nyne hundred peices of 8/8 in species
and 100 Ryxdollars, all in one bagg marked as in the margent
the same being the marke of his seale that he constantly weares
about him, for the accompt of him this deponent being Syvert
Gordeman of Wismire schedulat and his Owner that is to say the sayd generall
Wrangell of Stockhollen. Anthonio Rhyne Chell of Stockhollen and
[?Hendreck]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.416v Annotate
Too the 11th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 12th. he saith he knoweth not ye lawes and customes of Spaine
and doth not beleive that ye laders of ye sylver there without license
doe or ought to loose their propriety therein, and further or
otherwise cannot depose.
[ADD DATA]

[?XXerdt godaman] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The Keepers etcetera against the sylver}
in the Saint Paul. Hen Luck master)

The xxixth day of December 1653.

Examined upon the foresayd allegation.

2)

p

Syvert Goodeman of Wismar in Swethland master
of the shipp Sampson of Wismar aged 38. yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To ye sayd allegaccon and schedule thereunto annexed This deponent
saith that about August last past he did lade aboard his shipp Sampson
in Norway a lading of deale boards for accompt of his owners
Generall Wrangell and Company all Swedes, and sayled with the same
to Cadiz arriving there about September, and then and there as master
and merchant of the sayd shipp and lading sold the sayd deales
for 3000 pieces of 8/8 which moneyes he receyved then and there of
severall merchants that bought the same att Cadiz. and saith that
in the moneth of October last past .1653. he this deponent did [?in ?person] lade
part of the sayd moneyes to the value of 1000 pieces of 8/8 to say
nyne hundred pieces of 8/8 in specie and one hundred Ryx dollars
all made upp or putt up into one bagg marked as in the margent

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

being the marke of his seale which he carryed about with him, and
so laded the same aboard the arlate shipp the Saint Paul Henry Luck
master then riding in the bay of Cadiz for the accompt of this deponent
to be in the sayd shipp transported to Hamburgh and there delivered
to Jacques van Ronnen the factor of this deponents sayd owners
hereafter particularly named. And that upon the lading of the sayd
moneyes the foresayd Henry Luck did with his owne hand in the sight
and presence of this deponent signe three bills of lading for the
same all of one tenor, two whereof he delivered to this deponent
who sent the same over land to ye sayd Jaques Ronnen, and the
other was left with ye sayd Luck to come along with the sayd moneyes
being of the marke aforesayd and now shewne himw as and is one of 
the syad originall bills of lading videlicet that which was left with the
sayd Luck and ye same was really signed by the sayd Henry Luck
att Cadiz upon or about ye day of the date thereof, and the Contents
thereof were and are true and so had and done as is therein conteyned
And this deponent knoweth not of any other bills of lading signed for
the same parcell of moneyes. And further that the names of his sayd
Owners interessed in the sayd moneyes and their dwellings were and
are as followeth. videlicet Generall Wrangell and Antonio Ryne[?XXX]
Inhabitants of Stockholme, and Hendrick van didell Gabriell [?XX]
Joachim Severin Margaret Severin and this deponent being Syvaert
Goademan in the sayd schedule mencconed, all Inhabitants of Wismar
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.417r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 24th day of December 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

On behalfe of Robert Elison Thomas Borner)
and others touching the seizure of the)
shipp ffreindshipp et cetera [?Nixon] Master)

Examined upon the foresayd allegation

pd.

4)

Emanuel Wilson of Wapping in the
County of Middlesex Mariner late Gunner of the sayd
shipp the ffreindshipp aged 38 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.418r Annotate
To the 6 Article he saith that the foresayd Mariners by the said detention and seizure besides their 
former losses have suffered losse in expenses and losse of tyme
to the value of 200 li sterling or thereabouts, and the said Elison Bonner
and Company by the said detention and seizure over and besides the
losses aforesaid have suffered further damage in want of the use of 
their sayd shipp to the value of 80 li sterling per moneth besides the
want of improveing of their stock all which this deponent cannot
particularly sett forth. And otherwise cannot depose. 

Emanuell Wilson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 30th day of december 1653
 
The Clayme of Frocato Millenes merchant)
of Cadiz for one barr of sylver marked)
in the marchent in the shipp the Sampson)
Otto George Captaine taken by some of)
[?this] parliaments shipps.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Ffrocato Millenes

[?Sir] G. Mendez [?dt]

1. 

Antonio Estevan de Balderas borne
att Madrid in Spaine an Inhabitant of Limma
in the West Indies aged 38 yeares or 
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. Videlicet

+[MARK IN LEFT HAND MARGIN]

To the first article of the sayd allegation, this deponent saith that the arlate ffrocato
Millenes whom this deponent hath for these 26 yeares past well
knowne and bene acquainted with, was and is a Spaniard a native 
of Cadiz and there hath lived all his tyme and there now liveth with his
family and was and is a subiect of the King of Spaine and for
and as suchcommonly accounted reputed and taken. And further
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in the monethes
of September October and November 1652. the sayd Frocato Millenes
was and att this present is and ought to be the true and law full Owner and 
Proprietor of the arlate one barr of sylver marked as in the [margint]

'A'[MARK IN LEFT HAND MARGIN]
n°. 46. 

n°/ 46 weighing seventy six markes and for and as such commonly accounted
reputed and taken the premisses he knoweth to be true for that in the sayd
moneth of September 1652 he saw the sayd barr of Sylver in the howse and 
possession of the sayd Frocato Millenes att Cadiz, and heard him then and 
there say and declare that the sayd barr of sylver was his owne, and that
he would send it to Ostend to Antonio Lopez Swaso by Ottavio Jorge
and this deponent afterwards saw the same laden accordingly as is 
here after sett forth. And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the premisses
and to the best of his remembrance in the sayd moneth of September 1652, He
this deponent being of speciall acquaintance of and with the sayd Frocato
Millenes as aforesaid did accompany him with the sayd barr of Sylver from 
his howse in Cadiz in a boat into the bay of Cadiz aboard the arlate
shipp the Sampson whereof Otto George was master and then and there
saw the sayd Frocato Millenes in his owne person, and for his owne
accompt lade the sayd barr of sylver aboard the sayd shipp to be in the 
same att his owne Risgo transported to Ostend, and there for his accompt
delivered unto Antonio Lopez Swaso or his assignes as factor
and correspondent of him the sayd Frocato Millones. And further he
saith he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.418v Annotate
To the fourth Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in [?adXX]
upon the lading of the sayd barr of sylver the Purser of the sayd Otto
George in his behalfe did in the presence and sight of this deponent 
aboard the sayd shipp signe and firme three bills of lading all of
one tenor for the same two whereof the sayd Frocato Millenes took
with him to Cadiz and left one of them with the sayd Purser who
firmed the same to come along with the sayd sylver. And otherwise
he cannot depose. 

To the fifth article This deponent saith that the sayd shipp was bound for
Ostend and after she received the sayd barr of sylver on board her sett
sayle therewith towards Ostend. And saith it is notorious as he
beleiveth that the sayd shipp and her lading were seized upon the Coast
of England by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth and beleiveth
that the said barr of sylver was aboard her att the tyme of seizure
and came into the hands of the seizers together with the sayd
bill of lading for the same left to accompany it as aforesaid, which
bill of lading is since brought into the Registry of this Court where
this deponent hath seene the same this day upon a file, and the same 
was and is true and was firmed att the foot thereof Ottavio Jorge
by the foresayd Purser by name Peter Huckfelt or Pedro del 
Campovidio in this deponent's sight att Cadiz a ship board upon or
about the 26. day of September being the day of the date thereof.
And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after the
lading of the sayd barr of sylver the foresayd Frocato Millenes did
att his howse in Cadiz in the sight of this deponent write a letter
of advise unto the sayd Antonio Lopez Swaso of Antwerpe to whom
the sayd sylver was consigned signifying therein, that he the sayd
Frocato had laden the said barr of sylver for his owne accompt aboard
Otto George att Cadiz and consigned the same to him the said Swase
to the disposed of by him for the use and benefit of the said Frocato
and in the sayd letter one of the sayd bills of lading for the sayd
sylver, which letter this deponent read and saw the said bill of lading
putt therein, and seated and directed to the said Swaso att Antwerpe
to who the same was sent from Cadiz by the Landpost. And further
cannot depose. 

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he
knoweth well for the sayd reasons that the foresayd barr of sylver was
really and truly bought and laden for the proper use and accompt
of the said Frocato Millones and that he alone was to runn the sole
Hazard and Adventure thereof, and noe Dutchman subiect of the
States of the United Provinces or ffrenchman] subject of the French
King had or hath any right title or interest therein or any part
thereof. 

To the last he saith his deposition is true. 

----

To the Cross Interrogatoryes [CENTRE HEADING] 

Row dt [LEFT MARGIN] 

To the 1. negatively

To the 2. 3. 4 and 5. he saith the sayd Frocato Milenes himselfe whose howse
is in the new street of Cadiz did in this Respondents sight in the day tyme
about noone deliver the said barr of sylver a shipboard of the Sampson to the
foresayd Purser in the presence of Otto George himselfe Master of the said shipp
otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.419r Annotate
To the 6. Interrogatory he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd. 

To the 7. and 8th Interrogatories he saith he is sure that the said Frocato Millenes
did himselfe laded the sayd sylver, and saith att the lading thereof he
saw the said Purser write in a booke what he wrote knoweth not
and otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 9th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof. 

To the 10th negatively. 

To the 11. 12. and 13th Interrogatories he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing 
deposition and otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 14th he saith he was borne att Madrid and liveth at Limma
and otherwise negatively

To the 15th he saith he saith he did not see the said sylver bought, and 
further saving as aforesayd cannot depose. 

To the 16th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof. 

To the 17th he saith the sayd sylver was laden in the bay of Cadiz under
the power of the fforts of Cadiz and further cannot depose.

To the 18th he saith the said sylver was laden on or about the 26th day of 
September 1652 after which tyme this Respondent saw not nor doth
know or hath heard that any sylver moneyes or goods were delivered
out of the sayd shipp Sampson till the sayd shipp came to this
Port of London. 

To the 19th he saith that the said bills of lading being signed as aforesayd and
cutt asunder the sayd Frocato Millenes the tyme and place where
the same were signed as aforesayd tooke two of them into his owne
power and left the third loose without any cover in the hands
of the Purser who signed them. 

To the 20th and 21th he saith it is prohibited to transport sylver
and moneyes out of Spaine and ports thereof without license. 
and saith that sylver and moneyes so laden if it be taken in Port
by the King of Spaines ministers is confiscable, but if it escape
out of the said ports, it is a free merchandize and soe much
is generally knowne and observed as he beleiveth. And further
cannot depose. 

To the 22th he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions and 
further and otherwise cannot depose. 

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATUR, LH SIDE]
 
Repeated before Doctor Clarke and [?]

[RIGHT - SIGNATURE]
[A ___ uan] 
[De__lear]
----
The 30th day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The clayme of Vincent van Campen 
and others owners of the shipp the Sampson
of thereof Otto George was Master
for the sayd shipp and her tackle and 
furniture. Budd Smith Ffranklin. 

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers. 

1.

dt Ffranklynn [LEFT MARGIN] 

Henrick Martins of Hamburgh
Captaine of the shipp the Hope of Hamburgh
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet. 

To the 1. Article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he hath
well knowne the arlate shipp the Sampson whereof Otto George is 
Captaine from the first building of her which he saith was done att
Lubeck in the yeare 1646. And saith that the sayd shipp the Sampson
in the yeare 1651. having taken in att Cadiz in Spaine her lading of goods
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.419v Annotate
goods, and being bound with the same to Genoa and being in her
Course for Genoa in December 1651 was taken and surprized by
the ffrench and carryed into Tholone and there in fact adiudged
for prize, was afterwards by the sayd Otto George then [?and]
of her for himselfe and for the use of Vincent van Campen
John de Windt ffrederick Bevan, Daniel de Leon, ffrancisco
[?Pennincg?r] Don Joseph and ffrancisco Peralti and Company 
who then were owners thereof, redeemed att Tholone of the 
ffrench men who tooke her for the summe or value of XV thousand
peices of 8/8. the premisses this deponent knoweth to be true for
that being att Alicant in the sayd moneth of december [?165?2] he then
heard of the premisses by letters of advise from Tholone, and
further saith that in the moneth of January 1652 newstile [= JAN 1653 MODERN STYLE]
he this deponent sayled with his vessel the Hope from Allicant
to Genoa and after some stay there, the arlate Otto George came
thither and acquainted this deponent with the passages aforesayd, and
that he had left his shipp att Tholone, and was come to Genoa
to procure the sayd XV thousand peices of 8/8 the price of his sayd
shipps redemption, And saith that Jacomo Maria, and Thomaso
van Harten merchants of Genoa did of the certaine knowledge
of this deponent furnish the sayd Otto George with the said 12000 pieces of 8/8
to and for the redemption of his sayd shipp for the use aforesaid, and
that the sayd money was really payd att Tholone for the use and 
accompt aforesayd which he knoweth as well by the relation of the
sayd merchants and Otto George the tyme aforesayd, as for that he 
knoweth that the sayd merchants sent an expresse Messenger from
Genoa to Tholone to make the sayd payment, which Messenger that 
deponent afterwards videlicet in ffebruary 1652 new stile saw 
safely arrive from Tholone to Genoa by in and with the sayd shipp
and heard him upon his such arrivall say and declare that he had
made payment of the sayd redemption money for and to the use
and accompt aforesayd, and saith that by letters of advise which
he this deponent saw and perused he knoweth that the sayd Vincent van
Campen John de Vindt and Company did accept of the sayd transaction the 
sayd Otto George in their names made at Tholone, and well knoweth that he
saye Vincent van Campen being an Inhabitant of Cadiz and a [?great/?good]
correspondent of the sayd Genoa Merchants did severall monethes [?before]
October 1652 satisfy the sayd Genoa merchants for the sayd 12000 pieces of 8/8 on
the behalfe of himselfe and fellow Owners aforesayd, and so much this deponent 
being att Cadiz in the summer 1652. and before October of the same yeare
heard the sayd Vincent van Campen expressely say and declare. And further
cannot depose saving that the parties before mentioned for owners
[of the sayd shipp were the tyme aforesayd commonly reputed the lawfull owners]
thereof, and saving that he knoweth not that the heyres of Peter [?XXXX]
have sold the Interest they had in the sayd shipp to Cornelius Leman.  

To the second Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the sayd Redemption
of the sayd shipp the sayd shipp sett sayle from
Tholone aforesayd towards Genoa, where this deponent saw her arrive
there abide under the Command and possession of the sayd Otto George and his
shipps Company in the name and for and on the behalfe of the sayd Vincent
Van Campen and others the foresayd owners and saith that he this deponent 
about Aprill 1652 sett saile with his shipp the Hope from Genoa to Cadiz
and left the sayd Otto George with the Sampson arlate att Genoa, and he
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.420r Annotate
that she the sayd shipp Sampson receyved severall quantities of goods on board
her att Genoa to be transported in her to Cadiz before this deponent departed
from Genoa. And he hath credibly heard that she afterwards videlicet about
June 1652 did accordingly arrive att Cadiz under Command of the 
sayd Otto George, who then was and continually since hath bene Master
of her for and on the behalfe of the sayd Vincent van Campen John 
de Windt and Company the foresayd owners of the sayd shipp. And 
otherwise cannot depose. 

To the sayd cross Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

Row dt

To the 1. he saith he was borne att Hamburgh and there hath lived all his tyme
and now hath his wife howse and family there and otherwise negatively

To the 2. he saith he was not aboard the sayd shipp Sampson at the tyme of
her surprizeall by the ffrench, and hath heard as well by letters of advise
as by the confession of the sayd Otto George that the sayd shipp was att Tholone
condemned as lawfull prize. and further or otherwise having his 
foregoeing depositions he cannot depose. 

To the 3. he saith he was not att Tholone the tyme aforesayd, but by the meanes
aforesayd came to understand that the sayd shipp remayned att Tholone about
2 monethes that is to say from december 1651 to ffebruary 1652 new stile. 
and saith that he this deponent continued att Genoa from January 1652
new stile about 3 monethes, and the sayd Otto George came in his person
to Genoa in January 1652. and there stayd of this respondents
sight about 3 monthes and for sometyme after, this respondent leaving him
and his sayd shipp there as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 4th he saith he knoweth not the name of the partie or parties who sold
the sayd shipp to Otto George after she had bene taken by the ffrench and 
condemned, nor who are parties to the sayd bill of sale;.

To the 5th he saith the foresayd merchants of Genoa did not pay or deliver
the sayd moneyes to Otto George, but sent an expresse Messenger of their
Owne to pay the [sume] att Tholone but [?nehther] the sayd Messenger carryed
moneyes with him thither or tooke the [sume] upp att Tholone by bill of exchange
or letter of [Curdil] or otherwise knoweth not. and otherwise he saith he
cannot depose. 

To the 6. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd, saving that
the sayd Jacomo Maria and Thomaso van Harten are Italians and
so accounted. 

To the 7. he saith he knoweth well Vincent van Campen, John de Windt
ffrederick Bevin daniel de Leon and ffrancisco [Penningne] but Joseph
and ffrancisco Pevalti he knoweth onely by fame and report. And saith
he saw the sayd van Campen, de Windt and Bevin att Cadiz in Aprill
1652. but that respondent departed from Cadiz before the Sampson arrived there, And
he hath credibly heard that the sayd Vincent Campen and his sayd fellow Owners
did att their owne Costs sett forth the sayd shipp this last voyage from Cadiz. And 
further cannot depose. 

To the 8th Interrogatory he saith he last saw Daniel de Leon att Sevilia in the
yeare 1648. and remembereth not when he last saw ffrancisco Pennings. and 
knoweth not whether he hath seene Don Joseph and ffrancis Pevalti or not nor
knowing their presence. And saith he last saw Vincent van Capen, John 
de Windt and ffrederick Bevin in June last past  1653 att Cadiz
And saith he knoweth that the sayd Vincent van Campen is a Correspondant 
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.420v Annotate
of the sayd Genoa merchants and so accounted and that he does [?make]
busines for them att Cadiz and that divers attempts are made and
kept between the sayd parties in the way of merchants, and hath heard
the sayd Vincent Van Campen declare that the sayd moneyes were satisfyed [?to]
the sayd Genoeses. and hath likewise heard him and the sayd Windt and [?Bevia]
say that they had and did accept of the sayd redeeming of the sayd shipp in [?the]
manner as aforesayd. and more particularly to this Interrogatory he saith
he cannot depose. saving that he was att Genoa in March and
Aprill last past [165?3] and was severall tymes in the Company of the foresayd
Jacomo Maria and Thomaso van Harten having receyved severall
parcells of goods from them aboard his shipp Hope, and then and
there upon occasion of discourse touching the foresayd passages heard
them say and declare that they were fully satisfyed the foresayd
12 thousand peices of 8/8 of and from the sayd Vincent Van Campen
and Company.

Hinrick 'H.' Martens
----
The 2d day of January 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of fferdinando Numez)
for his wools in the Saint George)

Examined upon the  sayd allegation.

Sr Mender dt

3.

ffrancisco Lopez of Sevilia in Spayne [merchant]
aged 21 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as follow
videlicet. 

To the first and second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saye
that having occasion of merchandizing busines att Cadiz in Spaine
in the Summer 1652 where he stayd for severall moneths, he did
within that tyme see a servant of the arlate fferdinando Numez
a merchant of Sevilia who this deponent hath knowne for about [?11 yeares]
now past there living in the possession of the woolls now claymed in
severall boates in the bay of Cadiz, that is to say of 46 sackes of [feXXX?]
[? Law bd] wooll marked with the first marke in the margent. and

'D' [MARK IN LEFT MARGIN]

allso of 110 sackes of washed wooll marked with the second marke
in the margent, and saith he saw the sayd boates and woolls safely

'VR' [MARK IN LEFT MARGIN]

arrive att and lye by the side of the arlate shipp Saint George [?]
videlicet toward the Later end of July, and this deponent afterwards [?was]
att the ladeing of the sayd sergant of fferdinando Numez [?felt]
into distence with him, who then and
there told this deponent that the sayd woolls were the woolls of his [sayd]
Master and that he had brought them from Sevilia and [?]
lading them aboard John Martins for his masters account, 
consigned to Ostend for Gaspar Lorenzo of Antwerpe for the use of [?his]
said master, and this deponent afterwards saw bill : of lading for
both the sayd parcell in the hands of the sayd Numez his servant [?]
the premisses did likewise appeare: one saith that for the consent
aforesayd and for that the sayd fferdinando Numez is a merchant of [?]
driving a constant trade in woolls from Sevilia to fflanders, he is well
assured that in July September and October 1652. the sayd fferdinando  [?Numez]
was and now is the sole and lawfull owner of the sayd woolls and that [those]
were laden att or about the tyme aforesayd consigned as aforesayd for [his]
sole use accompte and Risgo. And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the third article of the sayd allegation he saith that after the premisses [XX in ?after]
the beginning of September 1652. he this deponent saw in the [hand]
[of]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.421r Annotate
of the foresayd servant of fferdinando Nunez four bills of lading
for the sayd wools of that did [purport] to be signed by the hand
and name of John Martins aforesayd, that is to say two of one [tends]
for the sayd Lambes wooll and two of another [tend] for the sayd [washt]
woolls, and saith that the two bills of lading to the allegation annexed
and [now] showne to and perused by this [examinal] were and are
two of the sayd bills of lading, and the contents thereof were and 
are true, and saith the sayd servant of the produced acquainted this
deponent that he was to send two of the sayd bills of lading to Gaspar
Lorenzo of Antwerp by the Landpost and beleiveth that the sayd 2 bills
annexed are those that were so sent. And allso beleiveth that according to 
[custome] two other bills of lading of the same [tend] with the bills of 
lading annexed respectively were likewise signed for the sayd woolls and came 
along with the same in the sayd shipp. And otherwise cannot depose. 

To the 4th. 5th and 6th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that after the lading of 
the sayd woolls the foresayd shipp sett sayle [therewith] from Cadiz of this 
deponents certaine knowledge, and saith It is notorious that the 
sayd shipp was seized upon the Coast of England by some of the 
shipps of this Commonwealth. and verily beleiveth that the sayd woolls
were aboard att the tyme of the seizure and that the sayd shipp and sayd 
woolls were then bound to Ostend and to noe other Port. And further
that the sayd fferdinando Nunez was and is a merchant of Sevill
in Spaine and a Spaniard borne and a subiect of the King of Spaine 
and an Inhabitant of Sevill with his family, and so hath bene for
ten yeares past and upward of this deponents knowledge being his
neighbour in Sevilia, to which sayd fferdinando Nunez the sayd woolls
[doe] solely [appartaine] and he alone [runns] the hazard and riske
thereof, which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd. And further
saving his foregoeing depositions cannot depose. 

To the Cross Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. negatively. 

To the 2. he saith he did not see fferdinando Nunez att Cadiz the tyme 
aforesayd and saving his foregoeing depositions cannot further depose. 

To the 3rd. he saith the servant of the producent did lade the sayd woolls but his
name att present he remembereth not but knoweth that he was and is a Spaniard.

To the 4th he saith the sayd producents howse is in the Street [Clareset] in 
Sevill. and further saving as aforesayd he cannot depose

To the 5th he saith he was not present at the buying of the sayd woolls. and 
further saving as aforesayd cannot depose

To the 6. he saith he was not present att nor saw the signing of the sayd 
bills of lading. and further saving as aforesayd cannot depose

To the 7. he refereth to his foregoeing depositions and further
cannot depose

To the 8th he saith he cannot depose. 

To the 9 he saith he cannot depose otherwise then as aforesayd.

To the 10th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 11th negatively. 

To the 12th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd. 

To the 13th he saith he was a native of and is an Inhabitant of Seville
and otherwise negatively. 

[?Signature]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.421v Annotate
To the .14. he saith the servant of the producent upon lading the sayd
woolls did acquaint this Rendent that he did lade the same for the sayd [?MXX]
accompt and risgoe./

To the 15. 16. 17. and 18. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 19. negatively.

To the 20th he saith he knoweth the sayd bills of lading now shewne him
to be the same he saw att Cadiz as aforesayd by the contents markes
and firmes thereof and further cannot depose.

To the 21th. he saith the sayd bills as he beleiveth were sent from Cadiz
to Antwerp by the post and from Gaspar Lorenzo of Antwerpe to this
Citty by the packet boat. and further cannot depose.

To the 22. he saith he was not present att the originall or first
delivery of the sayd bills of lading for which cause hee cannot further
depose than allready he hath deposed.

fran Lopes [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATIRE, LH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke)
and Doctor Godolphin.)

Ad P. R. M.
----
The 2d day of January 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

On behalfe of Robert Elison)
and others, et cetera touching the Ostrich')
Edward Nixon Master and goods seized by)
the King of Denmarke.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Edward Nixon of Newcastle Mariner late Master
of the sayd shipp the ffreindshipp aged 33 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the arlate
Robert Elison Thomas Bonner, Ralph Roll and Company all
Inhabitants of Newcastle about 4 yeares now past built the sayd shipp
the ffreindshipp for their owne use att their owne charges and
that the sayd owners have ever since bene and now ought to bee
sole Owners thereof which he knoweth being himselfe of [?XX]
and Master of the sayd shipp the voyage wherein whse was seized
in manner hereafter sett forth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation he saith that about the 19th daye of
May 1652 this deponent by order of his sayd Owners sayled his
sayd shipp from Newcastle on a voyage to Dantzyck and [?XXX]
for goods usually exported out of those parts for England, and
accordingly haveing taken Dantzyck in her course arrived with
the sayd shipp att Riga in June 1652. And that she departed
from Riga in August then next following and arrived in [?XXX]
moneth with her lading att Copenhagen. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that he did in the
moneth of July 1652 buy and provide and lade aboard the sayd shipp [?for]
Riga for accompt of himselfe and his foresayd Owners 9 C of [?XXXX]
att 6 li per C amounting in all to 54 li stock and 30 wainscotts att [?XX]
a peice amounting to 37 li 10 s sterling and 20 C of pipe staves of the [?valew]
of 30 'i sterling and 4 deales and 36 Ash oares of the valew of [?XX]
pounds 145 s sterling And further that the tyme and place aforesayd this deponent
and mariners of the sayd shipp for accompt of themselves did lade and
putt on board the sayd shipp having first bought the same for the sayd accompt
att Riga. 6600 weight of flax worth [?XX] s per C, amounting to [?XX]
sterling And that the sayd goods were all lost by the seizure hereafter [?mentioned]
and were likewise this deponent and sayd Mariners Cloathes and
necessaries
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.422r Annotate
necessaries of the value of 160 li and also the freight of the
merchants goods laden aboard the sayd shipp the voyage in question
amounting to 500 li sterling which was lost to the foresayd owners
and knoweth the premisses to be true being master of the sayd shipp
the voyage in question and saw all the sayd goods laden, and
knoweth that the same were lost to the rightfull owners thereof
by the meanes of the seizure hereafter declared, And otherwise
he cannot depose saving that the foresayd goods were all laden as
aforesayd to be in the sayd shipp transported from Riga to this Port
of London for the use and accompt aforesayd respectively.

To the 4th hee saith the sayd shipp the ffreindshipp was an able strong
and stanch shipp and was of the burthen of 300 tonnes or thereabouts
and having 14 gunnes, and was with her tackle furniture and
appurtenances being well provided of all necessaries well worth
the summe of 2200 li sterling and somuch would have yeelded in
this Port of London or elsewhere, and knoweth that 2100li
and upwards was really offered for her a little before the
voyage in question, and that the sayd Owners refused to selle
her att that rate. And further cannot depose.

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd shipp in her
Course for London with all her sayd ladingin her putt into the port of
Copenhagen under the Dominions of the King of Denmarke, and
there continued till September 1652 att which tyme she was with
the sayd goods in her stayed arrested or deteyned by the order of
the sayd King so as she could not depart home for England, and
that in the moneth of ffebruary 1652 then next followeing she
was with he sayd lading wholly and absolutely seized into the
hands and possession of the sayd King of Denmarke and by his
Ministers and his order and Authority, and that he this deponent
and his shipsp Company were in an hostile manner by armed men
commanded by the ministers of the sayd King absolutely turned out of
the sayd shipp and dispossest of the sayd goods whereby the same
were and are utterly lost to the true Owners thereof. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that by reason of the premisses the foresayd Owners
over and above the dammages aforesaid making to .2832li. 5 s have
suffered dammage in losse of tyme and imployment of their sayd shipp for
15 monethes (att the rate of 80 li per moneth, the foresaid shipp being well
worth somuch per moneth to be lett) the summe of 1200 li sterling besides
the use of the foresaid freight amounting to .30. li sterling. And this deponent
and sayd Mariners besides the losses aforesaid have suffered severall
other dammages, that is to say in necessary expences and dyet att Copenhagen
and home for England 110 li sterling and this deponent Pilot
and three men more of his said shipps Company have suffered further
in losse of tyme 112 li. over and besides the losse
of the Improvement  of their stock, which he saith he cannot
certainly value. And further cannot depose.

Edward Nix[?en] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.422v Annotate
Ad. R.R.M.

The second day of January 1652

On the behalfe of John Harison
and his mariners touching the
seizure of the Ostrich by the
King of Denmarke

Edward Nixon of Newcastle mariner master of the
shipp the Torrington frigot in the immediate
service of his Highnes the Lord Protector and
this Commonwealth aged 33 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

Examined upon the foresayd allegation

[ADD DATA]

hee saith the sayd shipp was an
able and stanch shipp of the burthen of 240 tonnes, and with 
her tackle and provisions worth 1100 li sterling or thereabouts, and
that her then freight for the merchants goods aboard her was worth
300 li sterling or thereabouts, and that she was well worth 40 li a
month to be lett And further he cannot depose saving hee
knoweth that the sayd John Harrison about August 1652 was
seized and taken out of his sayd shipp then lying under the [?XXX]
of Elsinore Castle.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.423r Annotate
The clayme of Didier ffauquot et ctera)

The 18th day of January 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3

Daniel Trenier of Saint Martins Lane London merchant
aged 43 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent ssaith that
he hath Credibly heard that about 8 or 9 monethes past the sayd shipp
the Hope Oliver Gwin master did safely arrive att this port of London
with a lading of wynes for Accompt of the Agent of the Prince
of Condes here resident and the producent Didier ffaucot
And saith that since that tyme the sayd producent in the presence and
hearing of this deponent did give Order and direction to his precontest
David Griell to buy for him a quantity of allum sugar and starch
and lade them aboard the sayd shipp to be from hence transported to
Rohan in ffrance and the sayd producent furnished him with moneyes
for the buying of the same and saith that
the sayd goods were so bought and laden by the sayd David Griell for
accompt of the sayd ffawcott, as this deponent hath severall tymes
heard  the sayd David Griel who logeth in this deponents howse affirme
And otherwise he cannot depose./

To the third fourth fifth and sixth articles of the said allegation This deponent
saith that the sayd shipp was in her Course for Roane seized by an Ostend
mann of Warr as this deponetn hath credibly heard. And saith and knoweth
that upon the newes of the sayd seizure the arlate didier ffawcot
did send over his sayd precontest David Griel to Ostend to redeeme
the same for him the producent and gave him a procuration under
his hand on that behalfe which procuration this deponent saw in
the hands of the sayd Griel before he went over to Ostend, and further
saith that the producent ddid likewise procure a Letter of Credit from
his precontest Michael Castil for procuring of such moneyes as the
sayd Griel should want for redeeming of the sayd shipp and goods
at Ostend, which letter the sayd Griel tooke with him to Ostend
accordingly. An this deponent by letters of advise from
the sayd Griel whilest he was att Ostend and partly by his relation by word of
mouth, since his returne, and likewise of the producent hath come
to understand and know that the sayd David Griel by assistance
of Mr Castills freind to whom he had a letter of Credit did there
in fflanders redeeme the sayd shipp and goods with Consent of the Court of
Admiralty of Bridges of and from the Imployers of the Man of warr
of Ostend that had seized the same, for 320 li sterling. and that
the sayd monet was frawne upon the sayd Castill by bills of
exchange, and that the sayd Mr Castell accepted the sayd bills
and that the sayd moneyes have since really bene payd for the sayd
shipp and lading by the sayd Didier ffawcot him selfe, to the persons
to whom the sayd bills were assigned, and that the sayd bills were
and are really discharged. And further saith that before
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.424r Annotate
To the 2 article he saithhe was present and heard the arlate didier ffaucot
give Order to the sayd David Griel to procure for him the sayd producent
and lade for his accompt aboard the sayd barke or vessell the Hope
severall goods, to say allom sugars and starch, to be transported
to Roane and there selivered for the same accompt and this
deponent saw some barrells of sugar carryed from the house
of the producent towards the water side to be so laden, and
hath credibly heard and verily beleiveth that the same and also
severall quantityes of allum and starch were really laden in
this port aboard the sayd shipp for accompt aforesayd

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.425r Annotate
O.O.O.

The 24th day of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers et cetera against the Patriarke)
Jacob)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Claes Colbrandt of Hamburg master of the sayd
shipp the Patriarke Jacob aged fifty yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
shipp the Patriarke Jacob in the yeare 1648 was built att the Costs and for
the Accompt of the sayd daniel Brands Adolph Sampton and Company
then and now all Burghers of Hamburgh, and that ever since her such
building videlicet in the yeares 1649. 1650. 1651. 1652. 1653. and monethes
therein respectively conteyning she hath belonged and att present doth
belong to the Port of Hamburgh, and for a shipp so belonging hath
for all the sayd tyme and is commonly accounted reputed and taken, which
he well knoweth for that he payd for her such building on behalfe of the
sayd Owners, and hath ever since bene master of her in the name of
them the sayd owners. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that ever
since the building and paying for the sayd shipp as aforesayd and for and
during all the tyme aforesayd the sayd daniel Brands Adolph Sumpton
Jan Norris and this deponent were and are the sole lawfull Owners
of the sayd shipp and her tackle and furniture and so accounted, saving
and excepting one Basilius a Bastill of Hamburgh was one of
the Originall Owners of one 16th part of the sayd shipp and so continued
untill the moneth of januart last past videlicet January 1652 old stile
or 1653 new stile, in which moneth this deponent for about 870
markes Lubeckes bought the sayd sixteenth part of and from him the sayd
Basilius a Bastill to whom he payd the sayd moneyes for the sayd 
16th part of the sayd shipp att Hamburgh about the tyme of buying the
same as aforesayd; And beleiveth the premisses are well knowne beleived
and discoursed of att Hamburgh and elsewhere. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation he saith that in the yeares 1648. 1649. 1650.
1651. and 1652 and 1653: and in the monethes therein respectively concurringe
videlicet ever since the first building of her to this presemt he this deponent hath
bin and is master and Commander of the sayd shipp, and being himselfe
a Part Owner was with the Consent of the rest of the said Owners appoynted
Master of her and as master of her hath made severall voyages in and
with her And somuch is as he beleiveth well knowne and observed, by
others skippers of Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the foruth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That it being the
Custome of the Citty of Hamburgh for Owners of shipps to take out every
yeare new Seabreifes or Certificatts, the sayd daniel Brands and Company
sent this deponent in the yeare 1651. a Sea Breife for the sayd shipp dated
about September 1651. and now abiding in the Registry of this Court and
beleiveth that the sayd daniel Brands, Adolph Sumpton Jan Noris and Basilius
a Bastill did sware and depose before the Lords of Hamburgh as in the sayd
seabreife whereto he referreth himselfe is conteyned, he this deponent being
att that tyme absent from Hamburgh. And further saith that after the sayd
Basilius a Bastill had sold his sayd 16th part of the sayd shipp to him this deponent
as aforesayd, The sayd daniel Brands Adolph Sumpton Jan Norris and
this deponent whpo then was att Hamburgh, did all together in [?XXX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.425v Annotate
sayd moneth of January 1653 new stile personally appeare before
the Lords the Magistrates and Senators of Hamburgh and being [?XXX]
sworne did then make oath and depose that the sayd shipp did really
and truly belong unto them the sayd Daniel Brandes Adolph Sumpton
Jan Noris and him this deponent and that they were the true and [?lawfull]
Owners thereof or to that effect, And that thereupon the foresayd Magistrates
or Burgomasters of Hamburgh did then grant a Passe sebreife or
Certificat under the usuall seale of the City of Hamburgh in such case
used bearing date the 21th day of January 1653. according to the
new stile, and that both the sayd Seabreifes or Certificates videlicet that
of September 1651. and this of January 1653 were both aboard the sayd
shipp att the tyme of taking and surprizeing of the same and her lading
by Captaine Penrose and Company in the Nonesuch frigat, and that
they came to the hands of the Takers and are since by them sent into
the Registry of this Court where this deponent hath seene them. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That the foresayd seabreifes
or Certificatts were and are true and reall and not false or colourable
and were and are sealed with the seale of the Citty of Hamburgh in such
cases used, and the Contents of the sayd Certificat of September 1651. were [?therein]
true which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd. and further referring
himselfe to the Acts of this Court cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for and during
the sayd tyme from the first building of the sayd shipp to this present the sayd
shipp Patriark Jacob hath bene constant[?ly] and from tyme to tyme fitted
furnished repaired and sett out by him this deponent att his owne
Cost and charges and costs and charges of the rest of the sayd Owners
according to their respective interests therein, partly by and out of
the moneyes arising of the freights earned by the sayd shipp and
partly by provisions and furniture upon the Costs and accompt aforesayd [?soe]
by the sayd Daniel Brands and Company from Hamburgh to the sayd shipp
And more particularly saith that in or about the monethes of Aprill or
May last past of this yeare now Current the sayd Brands and Companie
did send for the use of the sayd shipp in a small vessell of Hamburgh of
which Allert Hillbrands was master eight barrells of stockfish an [?XXXX] and new Hamburgh [?colours] and three sayles and by another vessell Of Hamburgh [?ffrederick ?XXX]
a large great anchor all which arrived safely att Havre de Grace where the sayd
Patriarke Jacob then lay being bound for Cadiz, and were by this deponent
receyved and putt aboard the sayd shipp and disposed of to and for the [?good]
of the sayd shipp and shipps Companye. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the
premisses the sayd shipp under Command of this deponent sayled with her
from Havre da Grace directly to Cadiz and there arrived about the moneth
of June 1653 and about the 20th day thereof: and whilest the sayd
shipp and this deponent did ly att Cadiz and after her such arrivall [?hee]
he this deponent receyved letters of Advise from his wife and from his
Owners from Hamburgh wherein was signifyed that they had sent to this
deponent from Hamburgh and for the sayd shipp and shipps Companie
[?eight] barrells of beefe, one greate Cable and about ten shipp [?XXX]
smaller Cable or halsers in the shipp Saint Jacob Hines Scoubeck of [?Hamburg]
Master and hath credibly heard that the sayd shipp Saint Jacob with the sayd
beefe and Cable and halsers in her was in her course for Cadiz from
Hamburgh seized by the ffrench and is there (with other shipps [?XXX]
in her Company deteyned. And further cannot depose saving he [?knoweth]
that the sayd beefe Cable and halsers were bought and provided [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.426r Annotate
Costs of the said Owners before this deponent came from Hamborgh which
was in March last past for the use aforesayd he this deponent being present
att and seeing the sayd things bought and provided att Hamborgh att
the costs and to and for the use aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 8th article of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd Daniell Brands Adolph
Sumpton Jan Norris and this deponent and the sayd Basilius a Bastill while
he was partowner of the sayd shipp did for all the tyme aforesayd constantly
take upon them to be Owners of the sayd shipp and give them selves out
to be Owners thereof and by such as know them and were acquainted
with them att Hamburgh and elsewhere did look upon them for and as such
Owners threof, which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and daily
observation of the premisses. and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 9th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for all the tyme
aforesayd from the first building of the sayd shipp and particularly on her
last voyage to Cadiz and att Cadiz whilset she lay there as aforesayd and
her Course from thence this voyage and att the styme of her seizure she hath
constantly worne and carryed the Hamburgh Colours, and hath not att
any tyme worne or used the Hollands Colours, or or Colours used by any
of the United Provinces, nor of any other Prince or State but of
Hamburgh onely which he knoweth having bene master of her in all
the voyages she hath made. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .10th. article of the sayd allegation he saith that since the sayd shipp was
first built she hath made onely one voyage to Amsterdam which her
voyage happened in the yeare 1649 and since that tyme she never was
att Amsterdam, and in particular saith shee was not nor hath bene att
Amsterdam or in port or place within the Jurisdiction of the States
of the United Provinces since the warres betweene England and
Holland, and that noe Hollander or ffrenchman or any other person whatsoever
but the sayd Daniel Brands Adolph Sampton Jan Norris and this deponent
and the sayd Basilius a Bastill ever had any tithe or interest in or to the
sayd shipp nor hath any person att present or since January last had any
part or interest therein the sayd Brands Sampton Norris and this deponent
onely excepted, And otherwise cannot depose.

To the .11th. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the last port
which the sayd shippe came from before she came to Cadiz where her
present lading now in question was taken in, was Haver de Grace in ffrance
and that she came from Haver de Grace in May 1653. and that the goods
there taken in being linnen Cloth was designed for West India, the
premisses he knoweth for that he was by his bills of lading for the sayd
goods bound to keepe them in his shipp 30 dayes after his arrivall upon
the bay of Cadiz, and saith upon his arrivall there and after 30 dayes
stay he did earnestly desire the factors att Cadiz to whom the same were
cpnsigned to receyve the same out of his shipp, and that they thereupon
requested this deponent still to keepe them aboard saying thhey were to be
sent to the Indies in the Galleons of the King of Spaine, and that they
daily expected some of the sayd galleons to come and receyve them, and
that he this deponent refusing to keepe them any longer aboard
but discharging his said shipp of them and deliviering them the sayd factors did
not carry them into Cadiz, but did of theis deponents sight lade them
upon another ship then riding in the sayd bay in expectation of the
sayd Galleons, in which expectation the sayd shipp into which the
sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.426v Annotate
sayd Linnen Cloath was putt, and sayd Linnen Cloth therein did remayne
and abide in the sayd baye of this deponents ight when he with his shipp the
Patriarke Jacob departed and sett sayle from Cadiz which was in the
moneth of October last past. And further he cannot depose  saving
that for the same reason he knoweth that the goods and lading now in question
were not nor are  not the proceed of the saud shipps lading carryed
from Havre de Grace to Cadiz as aforesayd and saving he saith that
for carrying of the sayd lading from Havre de Grace to Cadiz he this
deponent had a passe license or warrant from the right honourable the
counsell of State of this Commonwealth which passe att or about the tyme
of the seizure of the Patriarke Jacob came into the possession of
those that made the seizure to whom this deponent sent the same in his
sloope by one of his shipps Companye. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the twelfth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
(whereas in a paper or examination transmitted from Plymouth to
this Court It is pretended that this deponent being demannded whether
he hath not throwne any writings overboard touching the sayd shipps
lading since she came from Cadiz, did to that queation answer that
he threw some writings overboard but what the contents of the sayd
writings were knoweth not; now when it was or to that effect.) the
very truth was and is that this deponent att the tyme of his examination
arlate taken att Plymouth was examined in the English tongue which
hee can but very little and very imperfectly either speake or understand
and not by an Interpreter sworne and speaking the Dutch tongue
or Hamborough tongue, the question propounded to him by the [?Examiner]
att Plymouth was onely in generall videlicet whether this deponent
since his comeing from Cadiz had cast any writings over board
saith that he this deponent in answer thereto then spake and declared
well as he could in broken English to this effect, and not otherwise, videlicet
I cannot sweare for a vertaine whether I have cast any papers overboard
or not, but this I can and doe sware and declare that I have not since
my comeing from Cadiz throwne over board any passport certificat [?ffactorie]
bill of lading or any writing of importance whatsoever, or that did
concerne the sayd shipps Lading. And further saith that the very truth is that
from the tyme the sayd shipp came last from Cadiz, though possibly some
wast paper of noe importance might amongst the sweepings of the shipp
be cast overboard, which howbeit this deponent knoweth not yet there was
not by this deponent nor any of his shipps Company so farr as he knoweth
beleiveth or hath heard any papers or writings whatsoever videlicet  bills of
lading letters Certificats Charterparties or other writing or writings
whatsoever touching the present lading of the sayd shipp or any part thereof cast
or throwne overboard, but saith all and every such papers were constantly
and continually from the sayd shipps comeing from Cadiz in this deponents [?XXX]
and came into the hands of the seisers/ and saith that in case there  in
his examination transmitted from Plymouth anything putt downe contraty to
this deponents meaning, and for a want of due understanding of this deponent
who cannot perfectly render his mind in the English tongue. And such [?that]
upon his first understanding that in his sayd Examination from Plymouth [?XXX]
It is there in fact sett downe that this deponent did declare that he had cast [?XXX]
papers over board but knew not the contents thereof or to that effect, [?XXX XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.427r Annotate
he came not to understand till his comeing up to this Citty and upon perusall
of a Copie of his sayd examination by an Interpreter, he this deponent did then
take exception thereunto and affirmed that the same was not putt downe
according to his mind and that he was misunderstood and injured therein
and that he had not throwne any papers or writings any way concerning
the sayd shipps present lading over board since he came from Cadiz nor had
so deposed att Plymouth as in the sayd examination sent from thence [?XX XX] as
it seemes expressed. And otherwise cannot depose./

To the thirteenth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd daniel
Brands Adolph Sampton Jan Norris and this deponent were and are all
Hamburghers borne and so accounted, and every of them was and is
an Hamburgher borne. And the sayd Brands, Sampton Norris this deponent and
the sayd Basilius a Bastill have beene and are one and every of them hath bene
and is a Burgher of Hamburg and so hath bene for 20 yeares last past and
upwards and att Hamburgh have lived with their families respectively
for 20 yeares last past and upwards, and there every of them with their
respective familyes now live, and the sayd persons for all the sayd tyme
have bene and every of them hath bene and is a subiect of the free
State of Hamburgh and for and as such commonly accounted reputed and
taken. But where the sayd Basilius a Bastill was borne this deponent
knoweth not. And otherwise cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first he referreth himselfe to his foregoing depositions and his deposition
here taken in preparatorie, wherein he hath fully satisfyed the contents of this
Interrogatory and further cannot depose

To the second he saith that he this Rendent by birth and habitation an Hamburgher
as in his foresayd deposition sis sett forth was and is master of the sayd shipp. And
for full satisfaction to this Interrogatory saith That the sayd shipp the Patriarke
Jacob was built att Amsterdam in the yeare 1648, and the first voyage she
made was in the beginning of the yeare 1649. from Amsterdam to Saint Mallo
in her ballast. and in the same yeare she sayled from Saint Mallo to Madril
12 leagues from Granada in Spayne. and in the same yeare from Madrill to
Malaga. and from Malaga to Amsterdam in the same yeare 1649. and then
this Rendent went himselfe to Hamburgh to accompt with his sayd owners leaving
his shipp it being very late in the yeare aa Amsterddam where she lay that winter and in the yeare 1650
sayled her in her ballast from Amsterdam to Saint Mallo. from Saint Mallo to Allicant in the same
yeare, but in his passage before he made Alicant was seized by the ffrench
Cavall[?rires] who carryed him to Tholone, where he was plundered, and then went
to Alicant whither he was first designed: And from Allicant sayled the sayd shipp
to Havre da Grace in the same yeare 1650. and stayd there that winter. and 1651
sayled her from Havre da Grace to Cales, and from thence to Havre da Grace
back againe in the same yeare. and there wintered. And in the yeare 1652
sayled the sayd shipp from Havre da Grace to Cales, and back againe to Havre da
da Grace the same yeare, from whence it being late in the yeare he went in person
to Hamburgh by Land to accompt with his Owners, leaving the sayd shipp that winter att
Havre da Grace, And in May last past sett sayle with the sayd shipp to Cales
being her last outward voyage, and being now bound for her owne port of
Hamburgh she was in her Course taken and carryed into Plymouth where shee
now remaynes, All which he knoweth having sayled in her all the sayd voyages as
Master of her. And otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.427v Annotate
To the third fourth and fifth Interrogatoryes he saith the sayd shipp was built att Amsterdam
for the sayd owners by Jacob and Claes Ravens Timber masters theire to whom
this deponent payd for the Hull of the same ten thousand guilders, and
about 14000 guilders more for gunnes ammunition tackle furniture and
provisions which this deponent payd to severall persons of whom he bought the
same, whose names he remembreth not And saith that the manner of his
procuring the sayd money was as followeth. videlicet. He this deponent  by an
Order of his foresayd Owners did sell a shipp of theirs by name Saint John of which this Rendent
was also master, to a Lubecker for 6800 marks Lubeckes which
moneyes the sayd Lubecker payd to this Rendent att Amsterdam, and saith
there was due for freight to the shipp Saint John att the tyme of her sale eight
thousand guilders which moneyes Claes Van Woghall a Broker of Amsterdam
payd to this deponent. and the rest of the sayd moneyes this deponent
had remitted to him from Hamburgh by the foresayd
Owners and their accompt, aand some part of the provisions videlicet bread
and beefe were by the sayd Owners sent from Hamburgh, and this Rendent
is sure that the sayd money payd for the sayd shipp and appertenances was
the proper money of the sayd Daniel Brands and others the then Owners above
specifyed, because the greatest part of it did arise out of the sale and
freight of their owne sayd former shipp the Saint John. and the rest was
for their accompt remitted as aforesayd, in this manner videlicet part thereof
this Rendent receyved of his freinds Skippers of Hamburgh who had
freight due to them att Amsterdam, and drew bills of exchange upon the
sayd Owners for repayment thereof att Hamburgh
which they accordingly payd, and part thereof videlicet for sayles was payd
att Hamburgh by the Owners to the Assignes of the sayle makers of
Amsterdam for whose use this Rendent drew bills of exchange for the same
upon the sayd Owners by order of the sayd sayle makers. And further or
otherwise he cannot depose.

Class kulabrant [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The six and twentyeth day of December .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Liberty of England)
against the sylver laden aboard the shipp)
the Patriarke Jacob whereof Claes)
Colbrand is Master.)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of Antonio
de Labistraet and others.

Claes Colbrandt of Hamburgh Captaine and Commander
of the sayd shipp the Patriarke Jacob. aged 50 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
amnd saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the sayd allegation an schedule thereto annexed and bills of lading
mentioned and sayd to be exhibited and now read to and seene and perused by this
deponent Hee saith and deposeth that the severall and respective parcells of
sylver in the sayd schedule mentioned hereafter particularly deduced were
severally laden on board the sayd shipp att or neere Cadiz in the dominion
of the King of Spaine to be from thence transported and carryed in the sayd
shipp to Hamburgh and there o be delivered to severall persons severally
named in the foresayd schedule exhibited or their Assignes according to the [?XXX]
and effect of the severall bills of lading for the same exhibited. [?XXX]
say. one bundle marked 'ALB n. G.' conteyning two little barres of sylver
and one bagg n. 'H'. conteyning 150. peices of eight to Antonio da Labistraat
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.428r Annotate
merchant of Hamburgh schedulat: and one barr of sylver of this marke
'GSH no. 17.' weighing 439 markes to Hans Garts Jan merchant of Hamburgh.
And one little barr of sylver marked [MARKE] pura y Limpia. 'no. 11.' weighing
29 markes 7 ounces, and one bag marked 'FS' with 180 pieces of 8/8 therein
to ffrancis Sloyer merchant of Hamburgh. and .6. peices of sylver
of this marke 'M' weighing together 297 markes 2 ounces. to Daniell
Brands and Jeronimo Snitquer merchants of Hamburgh. And 5 peices
of sylver marked 'M.' weighing one hundred and ninety markes and two
ounces, to Adrian Younker merchant of Hamburgh. and allso three barrs
and one peice of sulver of those markes 'Lo. 2. N. 2.' weighing together
118 markes three and an halfe ounce to the sayd Adrian Younker. And
one peice of sylver marked 'M' weighing 56 markes 7 ounces to Joachim
Van Campen Pardons sonn merchant of Hamburgh. And allso three peices
of sylver marked 'N' wighing together 131 markes and halfe an ounce
to the sayd Joachim Van Campen. And two baggs marked '.A.' conteyning
two thousand peices of 8/8 to Albert Anquelman merchant of Hamburgh
and one bagg marked 'R' conteining 500 pieces of 8/8 to Peter and
Arnold Ruland merchants of  Hamburgh. And one bagg marked 'C.M.'
conteyning 250 pieces of 8/8 to Claus Moller of Hamburgh. and one bagg
marked 'WF' conteining 600 pieces of 8/8 to ffrancis Wollick merchant of
Hamburgh. And one barr of sylver nn. 991' marked 'XBK' weighing
120 markes and 5 ounces to John Baptista Juncker merchant of
Hamburgh. all which severall parcells of moneyes and sylver he this
deponent receyved aboard the sayd shipp to be delivered according to the
foresayd consignements respectively. And further saith that besides the
sylver above mentioned there is aboard the sayd shipp about 600 peices of
8/8 which is the sayd shipps stock and belongs to the aforesayd Owners. and about
200 peices of 8/8 more for the proper accompt of him this deponent who
hath likewise aboard for his accompt and use to drinke in three sylver
bowles porringers or tankers. 2 large and one small all weighing about 5 pieces of eight And beleiveth
it to be true that the mariners of the sayd shipp have aboard for their owne
accompt some silver  in their paletts and Chests, as is usuall, but how much in certaine
or what or any att all in certaine  knoweth not. And he moreover saith that
upon the severall lading of the sayd merchants sylver on board the sayd shipp
he this deponent the then and now master and Captaine of the sayd shipp did
att the tyme and tymes of the severall lading the same  aboard signe and
firme three bills of lading all of one  tenor for every of the sayd distinct
parcells severally. And saith that every one of the sayd bills of lading
exhibited and now shewne him was and is one of the sayd bills of lading of
and for the sayd parcells of sylver so signed, and of and for the respective
parcells of sylver above deduced and schedulated and in the sayd bills of lading
respectively expressed, and the same and every of them was and is severally
firmed with this deponents owne hand and name, and that he deid not signe
any bill oof lading whatsoever for any parcell of the sayd sylver whatsoever
of a different tenor from the sayd bill exhiited, nor any other bills whatsoever
except two more of the same tenor with every of the sayd bills of lading
exhibted respectively, And the sayd bills and every of them was and is true
and really in all [?poynts] saving that it being usuall to lade sylver att Cadiz
by feigned names he beleiveth some of the laders names are feigned and
not reall. And saith that the severall persons aforesayd Consignatories for
whose accompt the sayd parcells of sylver are respectively as per the respective
bills
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.428v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories [CENTRE HEADING]

To the .1. he saith that in the 600 peices of eight of the shipps stock which [?XXX]
his Chest and unmarked he hath interest to the proportion of 2/8 parts and [?XXX]
part thereof and also in the sayd 200 peices of eight which are also without
marke and not mentioned in the sayd schedule, the same being wholly his owne
and otherwise negatively.

[ADD DATA]

outwards lading. and that the sayd 200 peices of 8/8 of this Rendents are the
proceed of french hatts and some other things carryed by this Rendent from
Havre da Grace in the sayd shipp to cadiz. And otherwise cannot depose

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.429r Annotate
To the eighth Interrogatory he saith that after the sayd bills of lading exhibited
were signed by this Rendent as aforesayd, they were not out of this Rendents possession
att any tyme before the shipp Patriarke Jacob was seized by the sayd
frigat of this Commonwealth. And further cannot depose.

To the nynth Interrogatory he saith that he did deliver the two bills of lading of the
tenor of the bill exhibited for Claes Mollers sylver to the sayd Claes Moller
himselfe. And saith that the other 2 bills of lading of like tenor with the rest
of the sayd bills exhibited respectively were severally delivered to severall
persons who brought the sayd respective parcells of sylver aboard being
persons unknowne to this Rendent, some of whom he did then understand to be
Barkiers belonging to Cdiz, and others to be the servants or Cashiers
or merchants inhabitants of Cadiz, The names of whom or of their masters
or merchants that imployed them otherwise than by the bills of lading he knoweth not. And further cannot depose.

To the tenth Interogatory he saith that having never laded any sylver before this tyme
att Cadiz for accompt of merchants, he cannot depose whether it be as
usuall and customary to have sylver sent in shipps from Cadiz or Saint Lucar for
the Accompt of Hollanders and Subiects of the States of the united
Provinces, and subiects of the ffrench King as is upon the accompt of
Hamburghers, he this Rendent having not had occasion to take notice
what is usuall and Customary in this case.

To the .11. he saith he hath neyther seene heard or knowne that in tymes of
warr att sea sylver and other goods are mentioned in bills of ladeing
to be for the accompt of Hamberghers when really and tryly they
belong to ffrench or Hollanders.

To the 12 and thirteenth Interrogatories he referreth himselfe to his
depositions made to the same Interrogatoryes in preparatories, as not knowing that
is unlawfull to lade sylver and moneyes without license att Cadiz, or that
the Owners thereby loose their property therein, but having there seene severall
quantityes so laden in the open day without any molestation. And
otherwise cannot depose.

Class Colbarent [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 27th day of december 1653. [ACENTRE HEADING]

The Keepers of the Liberty of England)
by authority of Parliament against the)
sylver in the Crowne Imperiall.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

4

Captaine Claes Colbrand' of Hamburgh master
of the shipp Patriarke Jacob of Hamburgh aged
50 yeares or thereabouts. a witnes sworne an
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

Top the sayd allegation and schedule annexed and the bills of lading therein
mentioned to be exhibited This deponent saith, That riding att anchor with
his sayd shipp Partriarke Jacob in the bay of Cadiz neere unto the allegat
shipp the Crowne Imperiall Hans Meyners master on or about the
15th day of october last one Martin Gantzberch of Hamburgh skipper
being Marten Gantzber[?ch] schedulat came in a boate from Cadiz intending to goe aboard the Crowne
Imperiall aforesayd, but by reason of a suddeb gust of wind was forced to
putt aboard this deponents shipp where he stayd about an howre, and
this deponent then and there saw in his possession one bagg marked as

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

in the margent conteyning 4 hundred and fifty peices of 8/8 and one
barr which weighed 24 markes being part opf the sylver schedulat and
the sayd Martin Gantzberch then an dthere in discourse with this deponent
did declare that the sayd moneyes and sylver were his owne, and that they
did
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.429v Annotate
did arise out of his share of freight due to his said shipp Saint Paul of Hamburgh
and that he did intend to lade the same aboard Hans Meyners for his owne
accompt and consigne them to his mother Reghin Colebrands of Hamburgh
And further that hhe saw the sayd Gantzberch soone after arrive safely with
the sayd moneyes and sylver att the sayd shipp Crowne Imperiall, this deponent
furnishing him with 2 mariners to assist him in comeing aboard the
wind bloweing hard. And saith that att his returne from the Crowne Imperiall
to this deponents shipp Patriarje Jacob with the sayd 2 mariners, he the sayd Gantz
berch told this deponent that he had laden the sayd moneyes and sylver aboaard
Hans Meyners for his owne accompt and consigned to his mother, and
then withall produced 2 bills of lading both of one tenor for the same
being of the very same tenor with the bill of lading for the sayd sylver exhibited
and now shewne him, which bill now shewne him he saith is reall and
true and was signed neare Cadiz on or about the 15th day of October last past
by the sayd Hans Meyners with whose handwriting this deponent is well
acquainted. And saith that the sayd Martin Garnsborch is a skipper and
Burgher of Hamburgh and so accounted, and the sayd Reghin Colebrands
was an is an Inhabitant of Hamburgh and Stepmother of the sayd
Gansborch, and for and as such accounted. And saith that that the severall
persons in the sayd schedule annexed now read to him for whose accompts the
sayd severall parcells of sylver are in the bills of lading for the same [?exhibited]
were and are of the severall and respective places severally mentioned
in the sayd bills of lading and schedule exhibited, and for such
accounted and are all well knowne to this deponent Walter Sops and
William Henriquez excepted, but by fame and report the said Walter Sops [?is]
of Hamburgh; and knoweth not where the sayd Henriquez liveth. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. negatively.

To the 2. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 3. negatively.

To the 4th. he saith that whilest the Crowne Imperiall remained att Cadiz he
saw Joachim Schaer att Sevilia. and Syvert Goodeman and Martin Ganzberch
att Cadiz, which 3 persons this Rendent well knoweth. and the rest of the
parties interrate he knoweth not nor saw them, so farr as he knoweth att
Cadiz within the tyme aforesayd.

To the .5. he deposeth negatively saving his foregoeing deposition [?about]
the sayd moneys and sylver of Martin Ganzberch

To the 6. he saith he knoweth ffrancis Sloyer, Adrian Younker and John Baptista
Younker interrate all living in Hamburgh to say ffrancis Sloyer in Saint
Katherins street, Adrian Youncker in Dick street, and John Baptista
Youncker in Green street, and saith he saw none of the sayd 3 persons att
Cadiz the tyme interrate nor knoweth he who did lade any sylver aboard the
Crowne Imperiall for their owne Accompt

To the .7 he saith he cannot depose touching the propiety or Accompt [?of ?whom]
the sayd sylver otherwise than by referring to the bills of lading for [?XX]
the foresayd sylver of the sayd Gansberch excepted, for which he referreth himselfe
to his foregoeing depositions, and otherwise cannot depose.

To the 8th he saith he cannot depose

To the .9th he saith the 2 bills of lading of the tenor of the bill exhibited  for
the sayd Ganzberchs sylver were delivered to the sayd Gantzberch himnselfe
which he knoweth for the reasons aforesayd and touching the rest cannot
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.430r Annotate
To the 10th and 11th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 12th and 13th he saith he hath heard It is forbiden to lade sylver
att Cadiz and other ports of Spaine without license, but this
Rendent knoweth not whether it be so forbidden or noe, nor that the
owners thereof loose their proerty therein, having seene severall good
quantityes of sylver laden without any trouble or molestation
openly and in the day tyme att Cadiz. And otherwise cannot depose.

Claus Lala[?burnt] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 29th day of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Moses Goodyeare and John Giles)
against the shipp the Hopewell)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3)

John Bray of East Smithfeild in the County of Middlesex
Girdler and Citizen of London aged 38 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this cause att the Request of the
sayd William Hassard, and otherwise negatively.

To the .2. he cannot depose otherwise than negatively.

To the 3. he saith he hath not deposed.

To the 4. he saith he cannot depose otherwise than negatively

To the .5.th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than negatively

John Nray [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.430v Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

4.

John Stephens of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Waterman aged 23 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.431r Annotate
The 12th day of January 1653.

The Clayme of Manuel and ffrancis dirickson)
of Hamburgh for the goods lately seized)
in the shippe called the Hope of Lubeck of)
which Henrick Vinter is Master being)
25 lasts of tarr thirty four bundles)
of hempe eight hundred and forty)
deales 1440 pipe staves and 3 fatts)
of tallow by the Sampson a privat man)
of warr whereof [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Granger is Commander)
Suckly Smith.)

whaly dt.

Anthonio Fernadez Caravajal
of London merchant aged 55 yeares or
thereabouts a witnesse sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that on or about the
moneth of July 1653 last past the arlate Manuell and ffrancis dirickson
did cause to be laden in the sayd shipp the Hope of Lubeck of which
the sayd Hendrick Vinter is master att or neare Lubeck aforesayd
the severall goods allegat, to say 25 lasts of tarr .34 bundles
of hemp .840 deales .1440 pipestaves, and three fatts of tallow
all for the proper Accompt and Adventure of them the sayd Manuell
and ffrancis dirickson of Hamburgh to be transported in the
sayd shipp from Lubeck aforesayd to Haver de Grace in ffrance and
there delivered to Antonio Rodrigues de Moras for the proper
use and behoofe of them the sayd Manuel and ffrancis dirickson
The premisses this deponent knoweth to be true for that about the latter
end of August last past he receyved here in London a letter of
Advise from the sayd Manuell and ffrancis dirickson who are the
Correspondents of this deponent and so have bene for theis ten yeares
last past, bearing date from Hamburgh 15th July 1653. and
likewise another letter dated from the same place 22. August 1653
in both and eyther of which letters is certifyed that they the sayd parties
had laden aboard the sayd shipp att Lubeck for their owne accompts and
consigned to the sayd Antonio Rodriguez de Moras for the port of
Haver de Grace a lading of tarr hemp deales pipestaves and
tallow, which letters he saith are true and reall and not feigned
or Colourable, and the sayd parties in the sayd letters requested this deponent
in case the sayd shipp in her Course should happen to be taken and
brought into any Port of England, to clayme the sayd goods and
lading in their names, for that the same did really belong unto
them, or to the selfe same effect and saith he hath likewise since
August and since the receipt of the foresayd letters receyved
severall other letters from the sayd Claymers to the like purpose, all
which were and are true and reall, and that with the sayd letters
came likewise to this deponents hands two Certificates under the
seale of the City of Hamburgh by which appeares that the foresayd
Claymers did before the Burgomasters of Hamburgh upon their
Corporall Oathes positively sweare and declare that the right and
propriety of the foresayd goods was in and did solely belong to themselves
or to the same effect one of which Certificates, which he saith is sealed
with the seale of the sayd citty in such cases usuall, he this deponent
hath delivered to Mr Smith by him to be exhibited in this Court where to for the more
Certaintye
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.431v Annotate
Certainty of the particulars thereof he referrs himselfe.
And further that on or about the 18th day of
July last past old stile he receaved a letter of Advise of the sayd Antonio
Rodriguez de Moras a Correspondent likewise of this deponent and
dated 23 July 1653 new stile from Rohan wherein he certifyed
that he expected the arrivall of the sayd shipp and lading of the
like quality for accompt of the foresayd Claymers, wishing this deponent
to make enquiry if possibly the same might be taken and brought
into England which letter he saith is a true and reall letter, And
that he hath since the seizure of the sayd shipp seene a billl of
lading for the sayd goods, whereby and by the sayd Certificates
hee cometh to know the particular quantities of the sayd goods. And
otherwise cannot depose./

To the second article of the sayd alleagtion he saith that the Citty of Lubeck is
in peace and amity with this Commonwealth and this deponent by
letters and Correspondencies knoweth that Peter Mayer arlate the lader
of the sayd goods is an Inhabitant of the saud Citty and does much
busines there in merchandize for Hamburgh merchants. And
further saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that in the foresayd letters It is certifyed to this deponent by the
said Manuel and ffrancis Dirickson, that they had freighted the
sayd shipp the Hope of Lubeck and had therein caused the foresayd goods
to be ladeb for their accompt and consigned as aforesayd by the sayd
Peter Meyer And further saving as aforesayd cannot depose
saving that the foresayd Claymers did not onely request this deponent
in and by their sayd letters to Clayme the sayd goods for them in case
of their being brought into England as iis predeposed, but that  in
cae the prices of such goods here should be greater or as high as in
ffrance, that then he this deponent should sell the same
here in England and remitt the proceed thereof to them the sayd
Manuel and frrancis dirickson, who are as this deponent for the
reasons aforesayd is well assured, the true and reale Owners thereof

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
Manuel and ffrancis dirickson were and are Inhabitants of
Hamburgh and subiects of the free States of Hamburgh, and
that there is peace and amity betweene the States of Hamburgh
and this Commonwealth. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith is deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

Smith dt.

To the .1. he saith he comes to be examined of himselfe by advise of
Mr Suckly. and further otherwise than negatively cannot depose

To the .2. he saith he neither saw the sayd goods bought payd for nor laden
and further saving as aforesayd cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.432r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2)

Hendrick Ventner of Lubeck Master of the
sayd shipp the Hope of Lubeck aged 27 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.432v Annotate
the goods and merchandizes of them the sayd producents merchants
of Hamburgh. And further that he this deponent by the order
of the sayd Mayer did fetch and take the foresayd goods
out of the warehouses packhouses and yards of the severall
merchants Inhabitants of Lubeck of whom the sayd Mayer had so
bought and provided the same for the accompt aforesayd, and from
thense saw them all carryed a shipboard. And otherwise he
saith he cannot depose.

To the third and fourth articles of the sayd allegatio he saith that the sayd shipp the
Hope and her lading were seized on or about the 22th day of
September last past old stile, and that on or about the first day of October
last past this deponent came to London and within 4 or 5 dayes
or thereabouts mett upon the Exchange with his precontest Antonio ffernandez Carvajal
who had made enquiry after this deponents sayd shipp. And then
and there the sayd Antonio ffernandez told and declared to
this deponent that he the sayd Antonio had receyved a letter of
advise from the sayd Manuel and ffrancis dirickson with
order to nake enquiry for and touhcing the sayd shipp Hope and
sayd Lading and for him this deponent in case he should heare
that the sayd shipp were taken and brought into any port here
and that the sayd letter did advertise that the sayd shipps lading did
wholly belong to the sayd diricksons 

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.433r Annotate
hempe of a younge Lubecker whose name he remembreth not. and was
present and saw him buy the sayd deales of a Lubecker whose name
he remembreth and that ye sayd tallow was bought of Arnold Luiders
and the sayd goods were all to be transported to Haver de Grace there to be delivered
for accompt aforesayd to ye sayd Rodriguez Moras. and ssayth he
saw all ye sayd goods laden but did not see any money payd for
ye same nor any part thereof, nor was present att ye buying
of them saving as aforesayd nor cann declare how much money was
or is to be payd for ye same. And futher saving as aforesayd hee
cannot depose.

To the third negatively to every part thereof

Repeated before)
Dr Clarke and Dr Godolphin)

[?XXXX XXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The thirteenth day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of Edward Marston)
and Company Imployers of the)
shipp the Grace of ffeversham)
whereof [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] Brett is Captaine)
upon Interrogatories propounded
[?to the] Master and Company of the
shipp the Sunn whereof Jacob)
Symonson is master)
Smith)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the behalfe
of the sayd Marston and Company

Smith dt.

Jacob Symonson of Pomeran in Holland
Mariner master of the sayd shipp the Sunn
aged 23 yeares or thereabouts, a witnes
sworne and examined  deposetha nd saith
as followeth videlicet.

To ye .1. Interrogatory he saith he knoweth well ye shipp ye Sun aforesayd
and is master of her and saith that she ye sayd shipp belongeth
to ye port of Amsterdam, and to merchants of Holland videlicet Mr
Anthony Lewis of Amsterdam and Mr Albert Dirickson who are Owners of the
sayd shipp, 1/16th part excepted which belongeth to this deponent living
att Pomerania aforesayd two dutch miles from Amsterdam. and knoweth
not where ye sayd shipp was built nor by whom nor att whose Costs
but beleiveth it was originally a ffrench shipp. And otherwise
he cannot depose

To ye  .2d.

To ye third Interrogatory hee saith that he this Rendent and shipps
Company are all Hollanders and subiects of ye States of ye
United Provinces, and himselfe lives att Pomerana aforesayd and
his shipps folke att Amsterdam and Pomeren or thereabouts. And otherwise cannot
depose

(To

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.434r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Exasmined upon the sayd Interrogatories

2)

'Dirrick Dirrickson' of Pomeren in Holland
Mariner Steersman of the sayd shipp the Sunn
aged 40 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the 1, 2,. 3. and 4th Interrogatories he saith he knoweth well the sayd
shipp Sun and is Steersman of her, which shipp he saith was built
att Amsterdam and now belongeth to the sayd port, and to Hollanders
Owners thereof which sayd Owners are Anthony Lewis and Albert
Dirickson of Amsterdam who bought the same about 12 or 14 monethes
past of some Hollanders who had taken her from the English, who
had formerly taken her from the ffrench, and that his precontest
Jacob Symondson of Pomeren aforesayd hath interest in the sayd shipp
to

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.435r Annotate
The 16th day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Manuel and ffrancis)
Dirrickson for their goods in the)
Hope of Lubeck.)

3)

Henrique Georgia Mendez of Antwerpe
merchant aged about 48 yeares a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the sayd allegation and severall Articles therein this deponent
saith that It is notorious as he beleiveth that there is forme peace
and amity betweene this Commonwealth and the Cities and States
of Hamburgh and Lubeck. And further declareth that he hath
well knowne the arlate Manuel and ffrancis Dirrickson from their
Childhood and hath many yeares had and kept Correspondency
with them in the way of merchanize and Letters, and saith they
are merchants of good ranke Inhabitants of Hamburgh and
subiects of the free State thereof and so accounted, And that
he this deponent did here in London receyve a letter from the
sayd Manuel and ffrancis dirickson about the latter  end of August
last past 1653 and bearing date about the middle of the same moneth
wherein the sayd producents did advise this deponent that they
had caused to be laden att Lubeck aboard the shipp Hope (whereof
Hendrick Vinter is Master) by Peter Mayer their factor there
dwelling a lading of tarr hempe deales pipestaves and such
materialls for their owne accompt to be transported to Havre
da Grace in ffrance and there delivered to Antonio Rodriguez da
Moras for their owne use, and in the sayd letter desired this
deponent in case he should heare and find that the sayd shipp
and lading should happen in their Course for ffrance to be
taken and brought into England or any Port thereof, that
in such case he this deponents hould be aiding and assisting
to Signor Antonio ffernandez Caravajall his precontest in
this Cause, aswell in and for the Clayming of the sayd goods
in the names of them the sayd Manuel and ffrancis dirrickson
as also if the market were good here, in the selling and
disposeing of them here to their advantage and remittinge
the proceed thereof to Hamburg for the use of them the sayd
Claymers. And this deponent hath seene letters from the sayd
parties to the same effect in the hands of his precontest the
said Signor Antonio ffernandez. And that the sayd letter so sent
to this deponent is a reall and true letter and not colourable
and was really and truly receyved by this deponent the tyme
aforesayd, and was and is really signed and sent by the
sayd Producents from Hamburgh and beares date from
thence. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.436r Annotate
The Clayme of manuel )
Gomez de Acosta for the )
[XXX] &amp; [XXX] in the
[XXX]

The third day of January 1653
Examined upon the sayd allegation

3.

ffrancisco Lopez of Sevilia in Spaine merchant
aged xxi years or thereabouts a witnes sworene and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the 1st Article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the articulate Manuel
Gomez de Acosta and Anthonio Chavez whom This deponent hath well
knowne and bene acquainted with from his youth were and are att this
present merchants and Inhabitants of Sevill, and Spaniards borne and
in Sevill have lived with their families so long as this deponent can
remember and for ten yeares and upwards and were and are subiects
of the King of Spaine and so accounted And the sayd Anthonio Chaves
was and is an [Assentister?] of his Catholique Majesty of Spaine and so
account. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second third and fourth Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That
being about merchandising business and Affaires att Cadiz in the latter
end of Summer 1652 he saw in the possession of the sayd Anthony de
[MARGIN: mark] Chaves att Cadiz three [serons?] of fine grane marked as in the margent
which he told your deponent he had there bought and that he would send them
to fflanders by Christian Cloppenbergh, and saith that afterwards videlicet
in the beginning of September 1652 he the sayd Chavis did lade the
same for his owne accompt about the Salvador wereof the said Cloppenbergh
was master to be transported to Ostend, and soone after he had so laden the same he
shewed this deponent at Cadiz two bils of lading for the same by one of tenor
purporting to be firmed by the hand and name of the sayd Christian Clopperbergh
and that the bill of lading for the sayd graine
to the allegation annexed and now shewn to him this Examinat, which bill of
lading he saith is reall and true, was and is one of the sayd original
bills of lading and beleiveth the same was hither by Jaspar Larenco
of Antwerpe to whom the sayd grain was consigned and to whom the sayd
Chaves told this deponent he would in a letter send a bill of lading
for the same from Cadiz And further saith that in the month of October
1652 and about the beginning thereof as this deponent being in
the bay of Cadis saw severall boates arrived there at the said shipp of
the sayd Cloppenbergh wherein were the 73 baggs of wooll now claymed
and were then a lading aboard the sayd shipp by a servant of the
producent Manuel Gomez de Acosta who in discourse with this deponent
touch the same did acquaint him that the same were his masters woolls
and that he did lade the same to be transported to fflanders for the
accompt and [rise?] of his Master meaning and speaking of the sayd
Manuel Gomez de Acosta And saith that he this deponent soone after
att Cadiz saw two bills of lading for the sayd woolls both of one tenor
purporting to be firmed by the hand and name of the sayd Christian
Cloppenbergh, whereby the premises did appeare to the true, as also that
[MARGIN: mark] the sayd 75 baggs were all washed woolls And to be marked as in the margent
to say 49 sackes or baggs with the first marke, and 24 with the second,
And the foresay servant of the sayd Acosta in whose hand this deponent
saw the sayd bills of lading told this deponent att that tyme that he
was to send one of the sayd bills for Antwerpe by the psot to Jaspar Lorenco
to whom the sayd woolls were consigned. And saith that the bill of Lading
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.436v Annotate
Lading to the sayd allegation annexed for the sayd woolls and now shewne him
and is one of the sayd bills of lading and was as he believeth sent
Cadiz to Antwerpe and from thence to this citty by the sayd Locenco the [XXX]
and Correspondent of the sayd Gomez Acosta And the Contents thereof
were and are true. And beleiveth that according to Custome there was
a third bill of lading firmed to come along with the sayd woolls, and a
bill of lading for to come along with the sayd Graine in the sayd
Shipp. And otherwise cannot depose saving that the sayd shipp was bound
and the sayd woolls and fine graine were consigned to Ostend in [XXX]
there to be disposed to the Advantage of the producents.

To the 5 6 and 7th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that after the lading
the sayd goods he saw the sayd shipp depart there with from Cadiz on her [XXX]
for Ostend and hath Credibly heard that she was with her lading
in her Course by some of the Shipps of the of this Commonwealth whereby her
sayd woolls and grayne and one bill of lading for eyther of them
respectively came into the hands of the Takers. And further [XXX]
himself to the Acts of this Court the sayd bills of lading in the [XXX]
thereof he cannot depose, saving his foregoeing deposicions, and
saving that the sayd Jaspar Lorenco being the producents factor was to
make returne of the sayd goods respectively for accompt of the sayd
prodcuents to Spaine.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1st negatively.

To the 2 he saith he saw the sayd Anthony Chaves who did himself [?buy]
the sayd graine in Company of Christian Cloppenberg att Cadiz but saith
he saw not the sayd Manuel Gomez de Acosta there and further
saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the 3rd he saith the sayd woolls were laden by a young man a [XXX]
factor or servant of the sayd Gomez de Acosta named Juan his other name
he remembereth not. And further saving as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith that Manuel Gomez de Acosta hath his house in
Lawyers Street and Anthony de Chaves in the Carpenters Street
Sevill where they have lived with their families respectively ten
yeares and upwards last past.

To the 5th he saith he saw not the buying of the sayd woolls or graynes
aforesayd.

To the 6th he saith he saw not the sayd bills of lading signed being
not present att the signing thereof.

To the 7th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd

To the 8th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 9th he saith  he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd only
he is sure that the sayd graine was laden by the sayd Anthony Chaves
and the sayd woolls by the foresayd Juan the factor or servant of Manuel
de Acosta.

To the 10th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 11 negatively to ever part thereof.

To the 12 he refereth to his foregoeing depositions and otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 13 he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Sevil and otherwise
negatively
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.437r Annotate
To the 14th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesaid.

To the 15. 16. 17 and 18th. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 19. negatively.

To the 20th he saith he knoweth the bills of landing now showne him to
be two of those he saw att Cadiz as aforesaid by the markes and contents
thereof and firme att the foot thereof.

To the 21st he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesaid

To the 22 he saith that being not present at the delivery of the
said bills of lading he cannot depose./

[signed:] Fran. Lopez

[XXX] Delaplace
Repeated in Court
before the Judges
----
The 3rd day of January 1653.

Clayme of Blaze de La Pyna
for his woolls in the Salvador

Examined upon the sayd allegacion

3)

Franciso Lopez of Sevilia in Spaine merchant
aged 21 yeares or thereabouts a witness sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[XXX] Mender [XXX]

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4. Articles of the sayd allegacion and bill of lading
there annexed This deponent saith that being upon the bay of Cadiz
about merchandizing affaires in or about the beginning of October
1652 he then and there saw a boat or barke with the wooll now claymed
therein lyeing by the side of the articulate shipp the Salvador Christian
Cloppenbergh Master in the possession of a youngman a Spaniard
the factor of the [prodment?] who was then a lading the same and upon
occasion of discourse touching the same di then say and declare that
the sayd woools being marked as in the [margent?] and in the whole
11 sackes 4 of washed wooll and 7 of Lambes wooll, were the proper gods
of the sayd Blaes de La Pyna a Neighbor of this deponent in Sevilia
and that he did lade the same upon the sayd Pynaes accompt to be in
the sayd shipp transported to Ossend, and that he would and did consigne
the same to Antonio Lopez Swaso or his Assignes for accompt and use of
the sayd La Pyna. And saith that some few dayes after he this deponent
being in Company with the sayd factor att Cadiz saw in his hands two bills
of lading for the sayd woolls both of one tenor purporting to be signed
by the hand and with the name of the sayd Christian Cloppenberg
which the premises did likewise plainly appeare to be true, one of
which bills of lading he then told this deponent he was to send in
a letter of advise by post to the sayd Swaco att Antwerpe. And saith
that the bill of lading to the sad allegation annexed now shwen him was and is one of the
Originall bills of lading for the sayd woolls, and the Contents thereof
were and are true and reall, and he beleiveth the same to be the very
bill of lading designed to be sent from Cadiz to Antwerpe as foresaid
and that it was sent from Antwerpe to the Citty by the sayd Swaco. And
he further beleiveth it to be true that according to Custome there was
another or third bill of lading of the same tenor for the sayd woolls,
signed together with the rest and left with the sayd Cloppenbergh to come
along with the said woolls, which was as he beleiveth aboard att the tyme
of seizure, and further referring himselfe to the Acts of this Court and
the Registry thereof where the said bill of lading is sayd to be he cannot
depose.

To the 5. 6. 7 and 8 articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
sayd Blaes de La Pyna who this deponent hath know for [XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.437v Annotate
ten yeares last past and upwards is a Spaniard bourne and a subiect
of the King of Spaine and a Citizen and Inhabitant of Selivia
where he hath his house and family and was and is a merchant [of???]
to trade much in the Indies Spaine and fflander for sylver and
other goods and for and as such was and is accounted having
lived in Sevilia many yeares and 10 yeares and upwards of
deponents knowledge And otherwise saving his foregoeing
depositions cannot depose saving that after lading of the sayd
woolls he saw the sayd shipp sett sayle therewith from Cadiz
for Ostend and hath heard that in her Course she was with her
lading seized by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth by
meanes whereof the sayd woolls came into the possession of the
Takers/.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. negatively

To the 2d and 3 he saith he saw not the sayd Blaes de la Pyna att [C???]
tyme [inter???] and farther saving as aforesayd cannot depose, saving
that the sayd Blaes de la Pyna liveth in the Snake Stree in Sevil.

To the 4 he saith he saw not the sayd wooles bought nor can give any
accompt of the property thereof than he hath already given.

To the 5th he saith he was not present att not saw the firming of the sayd
bills of lading.

To the 6. 7. 8 9 and 10th he saith he is sure that the sayd woolls were [XXX]
by the sayd [producents?] factor and further to their interrogatories saving
as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the 11 negatively to ever part thereof.

To the 12 he saith he hath severall tymes heard the [producent?] say that
he had woolls laden in Capt Cloppenbergh and consigned to the sayd [XXX]
Lopez Swaco and further cannot depose

To the 13th he saith he is a Native and Inhabitant of Sevilia and others
negatively.

To the 14th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesayd

To the 15. 16. 17 and 18th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 19 negatively.

To the 20th he saith he knoweth the bill of lading now shewne him to be
one of the sayd bills for the sayd woolls which he saw att Cadiz as aforesayd
by the marke and contents and firme thereof.

To the 21th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than aforesayd

To the 22th he saith he was not present att the delivery of the sayd
bills of lading for which cause he cannot depose to [XXX]

To the 23. he saith he did not see the letter and invoyce [inter???] and
mentioned in the 7th article of the sayd allegation and otherwise he cannot
depose./

Fran. Lopez [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam Delaplace
Repeated in court before the Judge
----
[TEXT BELOW IS STRUCK OUT IN ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT]

The Clyme of Jasper Lorenso for
his money and goods in the

The third day of January 1653
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.438r Annotate
The fourth day of January 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of William Meurin of)
dunkerke for the shipp the ffortune)
of which Garret Clawson is master)
and the goods being ffrench wyne,)
and other small things lately seized)
by some of the shipps of this)
Commonwealth and brought to)
dover Suckly Budd)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Garret Clawson of dunkerke in
fflanders master of the sayd shipp
the ffortune aged 48 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he this
deponent in the yeare 1651 and in or about the moneth of Aprill of
the same yeare by the order and for and on the behalfe of the
arlate William Meurin did contract agree for and really buy
for five thousand four hundred and fifty livers or guilders the
arlate shipp the ffortune whereof this deponent is master, which shipp
att that tyme was called the golden Akorne, and was so bought
by this deponent of and from the arlate Reyner Johnson of
hartlinghem in ffreezland who was then in possession of her
as master and gave out and pretended that he had power from all
his owners to make an absolute sale thereof, And saith that hee
this deponent having so bought her offered himselfe ready to pay
the sayd money in behalfe of the sayd Meuryn, and demaunded
possession and delivert thereof to be made, but saith that by reason
of an Arrest which it seemes unwitting to this deponent lay upon
the sayd shipp for monety that had bene taken upp in the East Countrey
upon bottomery, and severall incumbrances incident thereunto, the
sayd shipp was not nor could be then delivered to the sayd Meurin
or this deponent on his behalfe although he this deponent as aforesayd
did desiire and endeavour it and offered himselfe ready to
pay the money contracted for as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot
depose, saving that he this deponent hereupon did by order with the consent
and in the name and on the behalfe of the sayd Meurin cause an Arrest to be made
upon the sayd shipp to the end noe other person might buy her
to the preiudice of the foresayd contract.

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after such
tyme as the sayd shipp had layne about 28. monethes under the sayd
William Meurins arrest Notice was given him the sayd Meurin that the sayd shipp
now called the ffortune formerly the Golden Acorn should be
delivered to him according to the foresayd contract, And thereupon he
this deponent by order of the sayd Meurin in the moneth of ffebruary
1652 old stile or 1653 new stile went from dunkerke to Amsterdam
to receyve the sayd vessell, and being come to Amsterdam where the
sayd shipp so lay under Arrest, he this deponent in the name and for
and on the behalfe of the sayd Meurin did there really and truly
pay unto the sayd Reyner Johnson in Ryx dollars and ducatones
the full summe of five thousand four hundred and fifty livers
or Guilders for the sayd shipp being the summe contracted for
as
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.438v Annotate
as aforesayd. And saith that the sayd moneyes being so paid and all
cleared the sayd Johnson delivered the quiet possession
of the sayd shipp to this deponent who
sayled her from Amsterdam to dunkerke arriving there in Aprill and there the
sayd William Meurin fitted her to carry a lading of Corne
or wheat to Biscay, and that he this deponent was appoynted master
of her and that the sayd wheat was accordingly laden but was
afterwards unladen by reason of a prohibition from the Magistrates
of fflanders for exporting of Corne, and that in August last
past he this deponent was ordered by the sayd Meurin to [?freight]
a lading of wynes and salt att Rochell with the sayd
shipp, which voyage he did accordingly performe, and as hee was
ordered delivered the sayd salt and wine att dunkerke to him
the sayd William Meurin. howbeit he saith that the sayd shipp
in her outward voyage to Rochell was mett with by an English
Caper that came from Poole who plundered the sayd shipp and
tooke away her Colours or flagges and her powder and provisions
of beefe porke butter and Cheese and two of her gunnes and so let her
goe upon her sayd voyage for Rochell, all of which this deponent
was an eyewitnes. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third Article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in the moneth
of October last past the foresayd William Meurin did sett forth the
sayd shipp the ffortune under Command of this deponent with 100
pigges of lead in the same, which he consigned to the arlate [?XXX]
Bosserode and Peter Coppens Residing att Nantes in ffrance to
be by them disposed for the proper use and accompt of him the sayd
William Meurin. And saith that he this deponent in his passage for Nantes
witrh the sayd Lead mett one Captaine Sanders Commander of a vessell
or frigot of this Commonwealth, who visited this deponent and his shipp
the ffortune aforesayd, And that he this deponent shewed him his sea briefe
and Letters and gave him an Accompt of his voyage, and that hee
the sayd Captaine Sanders was satisfued therewith and permitted this deponent
to proceed upon the sayd voyage And that this deponent safely arrived with his
sayd shipp and lead att Nants, and did deliver the sayd lead to them
the sayd Basserode and Coppens to sell and dispose the same for the
use and Accompt of the sayd William Meurin: And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after there [?receavying]
the sayd lead the foresayd Basserode and Coppens did lade all the
wynes now on board the sayd shipp the ffortune, all for the sole [?accompt]
and adventure of the sayd William Meurin of dunquerque, eight tonnes and
a halfe onely excepted, which 8 1/2 tonnes were laden for accompt of this
deponent and Mariners of his shipps Company. And further saith that
before such tyme as the sayd shipp came last from dunkerke the sayd
Meurin did informe this deponent that he had given order for the
shipps lading of wynes to be ready att Nantes to the sayd Basserode
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.440v Annotate
The 12th day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Thomas Brookes Jonas Cruse)
Stephen Cruse and Thomas)
Long against James Cade)
ffranklin.)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Thomas Brookes
and others

(1.

William Johnstowne of Saint Katherines
London  a Reformado lately belonging to the
James frigot whereof James Cade is Captaine
aged 23 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.441v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The fifth day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Lord Protector against a Certayne)
ship named the Leisa and her Tascjke)
and furniture and whatsoever goods )
wares and merchandizes aboard her)
taken and seized by the Kentish)
frigot whereof Jacob Reynolds was)
Captaine) being in the immediat service)
of this Commonwealth and against all et cetera)
and Peter and Paul Telement and)
others of the Greenland Company in ffrance)
in Speciall. Budd Suckly)

Row dt.

1/

Ralph Verney of [?great ?martins]
feilds in the County of Middlesex Marriner
late Coxen of the Kentish frigot aged
twenty yeares or thereabouts a witness
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.443r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The third day of January 1653 uppon the
allegation given on the behalfe of the Claymer

The Clayme of Symon Parience of Cadiz merchant)
[?for] his goods and merchandizes in the shipp the three Kinges)
whereof Joachim Beane is Master taken by the Saphir)
ffrigott)

John Thomas of Cadiz in Spayne
a witnesse produced and examyned in this
Cawse deposeth as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.444r Annotate
4th Jan; 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

2

John Morgan of Saint Lucar in Spayne merchant
aged 26 yeares or thereabouts a witnesse produced and examyned
in this Cause Deposeth as followeth/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.445v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
6th January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

4

Joachim Beane Master of the shipp the three
Kinges aged about 34. yeares a wittnes.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.447r Annotate
To the 20th he answereth That he this rendent wore the Hamborough
Collours uppon his Shipps [?Pope] and the ffrench shipp the ffrench Collour
and the English ffrigott with the English collours And further knoweth
not

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Joachim Behne [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 9th day of Januardy 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Paul Garcia de Santillana)
merchant of Cadiz in Spayne for his)
goods in the three Kings and Saint)
John de Grace and of Domingo de)
Baldus merchant of Cadiz for)
his goods in the three Kings taken)
by the Saphire frigot and brought)
into Plymouth. Smith. Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Claymers.

Rp.

Juan Thomas Milute of
Cadiz in Spaine merchant aged
23 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and
sayeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
arlate Paul Garcia Santillana and Domingo de Baldus
who are both of them persons well knowne to this deponent
were and are merchants and Inhabitants of Cadiz and Spaniards
borne and subiects of the King of Spaine and merchants of
good esteeme and account and so accounted which he knoweth
being a native and  Inhabitant  of Cadiz abd having frequent
converse with the sayd parties. And otherwise he cannot depose
saving, that he is the servant to the sayd Santillana, and factor
to both of the sayd partie whereby he hath more particular knowledge
of them and their trade and dealings.

To the second Article of the sayd allegation he saith that in the moneth of
August last past 1653. the arlate Paul Garcia de Santillana
and Domingo de Baldus did send this deponent being Thomas
Miluti arlate as their factor or Agent from Cadiz to Saint Malloes
in ffrance to buy linnen Cloth there for their use and accompt
and to transport the same to Cadiz or Saint Lucar in Spain. And
that to effect the same the sayd Paul Garcia Santillana did deliver unto this
deponent att Cadiz aforesayd a quantity of leather and Indico
of good value, and the sauyd Domingo de Baldus did deliver
unto him this deponent att Cadiz the number of 700 pieces of 8/8
to that purpose, and this deponent with the sayd goodes and moneyes
and arrived with the same att Saint Mallos in the month of
September 1652, And otherwise he cannot depose./

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That after
the arrivall of this deponent att Saint
mallo as aforesayd, he this deponent did there sell
the sayd Indico and leather for the use and accompt of the
sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.447v Annotate
sayd Paul Garcia de Santillana and did with the proceed thereof
buy linnen Cloth for the use and accompt of the sayd Paul Garcia
and did with the sayd seven hundred peeces of eight buy linnen Cloath
for the use and accompt of the sayd Domingo Baldus. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the [?buying]
and packing upp of the sayd linnen he this deponent did in the [?sayd]
moneth of September 1653. att Saint Mallo for the proper accompt of
the sayd Paulus Garcia de Santiallana lade sixteene of the foresayd packs
and bales numbred as aforesayd and uner the five [?XXXX]
aforesayd aboard the arlate shipp the Three Kings. and [?XXX]
and place aforesayd aboard the John de Grace the foresayd [?fower]
under the 6. 7. and 8th markes aforesayd, all for the sole use and
accompt of the sayd Santillana. and on board the sayd shipp the Three
Kings the other four packs no. 1. 2. 3. 4 marked [?BXX] for the
sole use and accompt of the sayd Domingo Baldus, all [?to ?be]
carryed and transported in the sayd shipps respectively for
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.448v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he was a board the three Kings att the tyme of seizure
and came first aboard as a Passenger 11. October new stile 1653

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne Paulus de Garcia Santillana [?15]
yeares. and Domingo de Baldus 4 yeares. and this Rendent being
Thomas Milutti interrate went aboard the sayd shipps respectively with
the foresayd linnen att theladeing thereof. and further saving as
aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the third he saith the sayd Santillana and Baldus so long as this Rendent
hath knowne the have lived in Cadiz with their wives and families
and by report all their tymes being natives of the same place. and
further saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the fourth Interrogatory he saith he this Rendent bought the sayd goods
all att Saint Malloes in the publick place for sale there of severall
merchants whose names he remembreth not for ready moneyes that is
to say the goods of the sayd Baldus with the peeces of eight aforesayd, and the
goods of the sayd Santillana with ffrench moneyes arising upon
the sale of the hides or leather and Indicoe aforesayd. And
further cannot depose

To the fifth Interrogatory he saith that having bought the sayd goods he
disposed them till the the of ladeing in the howse of the sayd
Nicholas Magon a ffrenchman who assisted this Rendent in the buying aand [?XXX]
the same att a rate of 1 1/2 per Centum this Rendent not speaking
the french language, and this Rendent went aboard with the foresayd
goods himselfe accompanied with the sayd Magon who did [?save]
this Rendent severall incident charges in his such assistance.

To the .6. he saith he sold the sayd Leather and Indico for 400
french Crownes att Saint Mallo, and that the sayd Leather and Indico and the
700 peeces of eight aforesayd came with this Rendent from Cadiz in the shipp the
Saint Vincent whereof Monsieru de Bolegao was master. And further saving as
aforesayd he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.449r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 11th he saith he is a native and inhabitant of Cadiz and
serves the sayd Santillana as a servant of his howse and merchant in his busines of trade
and otherwise negatively.

[ADD DATA]

To the .17. he saith the John of Grace was taken in fight, videlicet
the John of Grace fought with the English frigott that subdued
her about 4 or 5 howres and that he this REndent was aboard the
Three Kings which shipp did not fight nor was taken in fight
but after the fight was over, and that the sayd Santillana and Baldus
were neither of them aboard eyther of the sayd shipps the tyme aforesayd.

To the .18.th he saith there did come 5 or 6 french shipps from
Saint Malloes in Company with the three Kings and Saint John and were
in Company of them when the Saphire frigot fought, but as for
any Consortshipp, or Agreement made att Saint Mallo or elsewhere
to fight the English if they mett them, this Rendent for his part
neyther knoweth nor hath heard of any such matter And
otherwise cannot depose

To the 19th he saith that the John de Grace and other 5 or 6 ffrench
shipps fought with the Saphire frigott unedr the ffrench Colours
and that the Sapphire frigot then wore the Colours of this Commonwealth
and that the three Kings being forced so to do by the other shipps
did for a shew shoot three or 4 gunnes, but att random and arr
off from the Saphire frigot, and did not fight att all nore wore the ffrench
Colours but the Hamburgh Colours onely. And otherwise cannot depose

Dam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

[?XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.449v Annotate
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Rp.

2)

Juan Martin of Saint Lucar om
Spaine merchant aged 26 yeares or
thereabouts merchant a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

[ADD DATA]


HCA 13/68 f.451v Annotate
The tenth day of January .1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Rp.

3

Capt Joachim Beane of Hamburg master of
the sayd shipp the Three Kings aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth, videlicet.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 and 6 articles of the sayd allegation he saith that the
arlate Paul Garcia de Santillana and Domingo de Baldus are
Spaniards merchants Inhabiting in Cadiz and Subiects of the Ling
of Spaine and for such have neeme well knowne to this deponent
for theis eight yeares last past and upwards, And saith that being att
Saint Mallo in September last past hee there saw the shipp Saint Vincent
arrive from Cadiz and therein the arlate Juan Thomas Milutti and with
him severall good quantities of leather and indico which were as
the sayd Milutta then sayd the goods of the sayd Santillana, and sayd
allso that he had 700 pieces of 8/8 for accompt of the sayd Baldus, And
further saith that the sayd Juan Thomas Miluti did with the
assistance of one Nicholas Magon to whom he was recommended
convert the sayd leather Indico and pieces of eight into Linnen Cloth
att Mallo for accompt of the sayd Claymers part of which
Linnen Cloth made upp into packes and marked as is hereafter
sett forth, the sayd Juan Thomas Millutti assisted with the
sayd Magon did lade aboard this deponents shipp in manner as
is hereafter sett forth, and otherwise cannot depose

To the 7. and 8th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that toward the later
end of September 1653, the sayd Juan Thomas Miluti as factor
and for the sayd Claymers, assisted by the sayd Magon did lade aboard
the said shipp the Three Kings this deponent master then riding
att Saint Mallo, and bound for Saint Lucar or Cadiz the severall good
hereafter specifuyed all to be in the sayd shipp transported to
Saint Lucar or Cadiz for accompt of the sayd Claymers as followeth
that is to say .16 packes of Linnen Cloth for accompt of the
sayd Santillana, numbred and marked as followeth, that  is to day
three packes .5. 6. 7. marked with the first marke in the margent
and  3 more no. 1 . 2 .3. with the 2d marke, and 4 more no. 1. 2. 3.
with the 3d marke and one more n. 2. with the 4th marke and
5 more no. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 with the fifth marke in the margent
And allso four packes no. 1. 2. 3. 4 marked 'CBD' for the accompt
of the sayd Domingo de Baldus. And further that on or about
the latter end of the sayd moneth of September videlicet the 27th of
the same he this deponent signed .6. bills of llading for
the sayd Santillanaes 16 packes aforesayd, to say three of one tenor
for 13 of the sayd packes and three more of one tenor for the
other three packes. and also three more of one tenor for the
sayd Baldus his sayd 4 packes, And further that 2 of the
bills of lading to the allegation annexed and now shewne him
and having this deponents name att the foot of each
of them respectively were and are two of the sayd originall bills
of lading, and were are signed with and by this deponents owne
(hand
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.452r Annotate
hand and were so signed att Saint Mallo upon or about the day of the
date thereof, as the same are now to be seene. and the contents of the
same were and are true,m and so had and done as therein is conteyned, and
beleiveth that the same together with one more for the three packes
of Santillana since lost (as he hath heard) and allso the said bill annexed
signed ffrancois Truhotts att the foot thereof were in the possession
of the sayd Juan Thomas att the tyme of the seizure, who came as Passenger
in this deponents sayd shipp the three Kings aforesayd.

To the 9th and tenth articles he saith that after the lading of the sayd
goods the sayd shipp three Kings and shipp Saint John arlate did
depart from Saint Mallo, and in their Course for Cadiz were taken
by the Sapphire frigott, and that att the tyme of  sseizure the
sayd goods laden aboard the three Kings as aforesayd were on board
her and came to the hands of the takers. And beleiveth for
the reasons aforesayd that noe subiect of the ffrench King of States of
the United Provinces had or hath any share title or interest in the
sayd goods soe laden aboard the three Kings. and further or
otherwise saving his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.453r Annotate
To the 17. and 18th he saith that the shipp Saint John was taken in
fight, but the three Kings was not taken in fight, nor did att all
fight against the Sapphire fregott. And further that there came
from Saint Mallo about .7. ffrench shipps whereof the Saint John was one in
Company of the three Kings, and that the three kings ws not in
Consortshipp with them, n=nor did this Rendent make any Agreement
with them or the Masters of any of them to fight the English nor
doth he know that any such agreement was att all made att Saint
Mallo or elsewhere, and further that the sayd ffrench shipps mett
the Sapphire frigott and fought with her, and that this Rendent
not shooting but seeking to get away the ffrench Admirall
threatned to sinke him if he shot not, whereupon this Rendent
did cause three or 4 shott to be made att random onely and not
att or twoards the Saphire frigot and that the three kings
about an howre after the sayd fight began escaped out of the ffleet
or ffrench shipps aforesayd, and that the sayd fight continued betwixt
the sayd ffrench shipps and Saphir frigott three or four howres after
and that att night and long after the fight this deponent
having made stay of his shipp to wait for the sayd frigott that made
after him, did voluntarily submitt. And further cannot depose

To the 19th article he saith that the sayd ffrench shipps so fought under the
ffrench Colours against the Saphire frigot which then had out the
English Colours, and that the three Kings fought not at all nor
did weare the ffrench Colours at all, but had out the Hamburgh
Colours onely and noe other. And otherwise cannot depose

Sam Delaplace [SIGNATURE, LH SIDE]

Jochim Behn [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The tenth day of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Rp.

4)

Juan de Casa nova velin of Cadiz merchant
aged 25 yeares or thereabouts a  witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that the sayd Paulus Garcia Santillana and Domingo de Baldas
both of whom this deponent hath well knowne nyne yeares and upwards
were and are Spaniards borne subiects of the King of Spaine
and have for all the sayd tyme lived and now doe live in Cadiz
with thei respective families, and by common repute have there
lived many yeares before, And saith that hee this deponent
being att Cadiz in August last past and bound from thence to
Saint Mallo in the shipp Saint Vincent did there by come to know and
take notice that the sayd Santillana did send upon his owne accompt in the sayd shipp 
Saint Vincent by the arlate Juan Thomas Melatti to be
transported
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.454r Annotate
And further cannot depose saving that upon the buying of
the sayd linnen and ever since the sayd Santillana hath bene
and now is the sole owner of the sayd 20 packes of the sayd 8
markes marked in the margent. and the sayd Baldens was and is lawfull
Owner of the sayd 4 packes marjked 'BD'.

To the 8. 9. and 10th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that fter the sayd goods
were laden he saw the masters of the sayd shipps in the howse of
the sayd Magon firme bills of lading for all the sayd goods to witt
he saw Joachim Beane master of the three Kings signe three bills of lading
all of one tenor for thirteene of the sayd Santillanaes packes. and three
more of one tenor for three more of the sayd Santillanaes packes. 16 in all
laden aboard the three Kings. and three more of one tenor for the
sayd 4 packes of Domingo Baldns and that two of the bills of lading
to the allegation annexed and now shewne him firmed by the name
of the sayd Beane att the foot thereof were and are two of the sayd
bills which this deponent saw so firmed and the contents thereof
are true. And saith he saw likewise the master of the Saint John firm
three bills of lading all of one tenor for 4 of the sayd Santillanaes
packes aforesayd and that the bill of lading now shewne him haveinge
this name ffrancois Trachott att the foot thereof was and is one
of the sayd bills and the Contents thereof were and are truem and
that the sayd bills now shewne him came along with the sayd Fran Thorney
in the sayd shipp three Kings. And further that the sayd shipps
having taken in their lading departed from Saint Mallo for cadis
and were in their Course taken by the Saphire frigott and that the
sayd goods were then aboard the sayd shipps respectively as aforesayd, which
he knoweth being a passenger aboard the Saint John.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.455r Annotate
The 22th day of March [.165?4] [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of William Gellard,)
merchant of Cadiz in Spaine)
for his goods in the Saint John da)
[?XXX]

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2dus.

Juan Thomas Meluti of Cadiz in Spayne
merchant aged 26 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

To the 1. and 2. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
William Gellard is a person well knowne to this deponent and is
a Spaniard and by repute a native of Cadiz and there hath lived
for theis eight yeares last past of this deponents knowledge
and is a subiect of the King of Spaine and so accounted. And
saith that the sayd William Gellard about the month of August
1653 last past accompanied with this deponent and his precontest
Juan da Casa Nuesta, embarked himselfe att Cadiz in the shipp
Saint Vincent upon a designe to goe to Saint Mallo and there buy
linnen and other goods to returne with the same for Cadiz for his
owne accompt and of Captaine Claudia da Ulloa who was and is
a Spaniard and inhabitant of Cadiz and that for the providing
of the sayd linnen and other goods in ffrance he tooke with him
severall packes and sugars, of the value of three thousand
five hundred peices of 8/8 more or lesse of Spanish money which
he did lade and putt on board the Saint Vincent for accompt of
himselfe and sayd Captaine Ulloa of the sight and certaine knowledge
of this deponent who was his Companion in the sayd voyage, and that
the sayd sugars and peackes arrived safely att Saint Mallo in
the possession of the sayd Gellard who there sold the same of the
sight of this deponent and with the proceed thereof bought the
serges, linnen Cloath ad shirts hereafter particularly mentioned
for accompt of himselfe and the sayd Captaine de Ulloa. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.458r Annotate
The 5th day of November 1653:/ [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Peter Tam for his sylver)
in the Salvadore)

Examined upon the said Allegation/

3us./

Gaspar Tam of Hamborough Purser of the
shipp the Goulden Sunn of Hamburgh aged 24.
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined saith and 
deposeth as followeth are:/

To the first second and third articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth 
That the allegate Peter Tam of Hamborough hath for the time arlate and
for about 9 yeares before driven a Constant trade to Saint Lucar and Cadiz
in Spaine for plate and sylver to be for his Accompt transported there to
Dunquirke Ostend and Hamborough, and for the time predeposed the said
Peter Tam the producent had and hath his Agents and Corrrespondents resident
at Saint Lucar and Cadiz aforesaid; Hee further saith, That in the monethes
of August and September in the yeare 1652. last past the said producent
was and now is ought to bee the Lawfull Owner and Proprieter of one 
bagg marked with the marke in the margeut, and of fower hundred fiftie

'TAM' [MERCHANTS MARKE, LH MARGIN]

six peeces of eight in the same, and for Owner thereof the said Peter Tam
for all the said time was and is reputed and taken; Which hee knoweth for
that hee this deponent in or about the moneths predeposed Caused the said
bagg so marked with all the pieces of eight predeposed to be laden in and
aboard the shipp the Salvadore (Christian Cloppenburgh Master) then lyeing at
or neare Cadiz to be transported in the said shipp to Ostend in fflanders and
there to be delivered, and from thence remitted to the said Peter Tam his wife at
Hamborough, for the accompt of the said producent. And otherwise saving his
following Deposition hee saith hee cannot Depose; saving that this Deposition: being
Cozen of and to the said producent, and having sailed with him for about ten
yeares last past, is thereby well acquainted with his negotiation and trade:

To the 4th article and the bill of lading therein exhibited in the Registry of the
Court and now showne to this Examinate at the time of his examination
hee saith and deposeth, That immediately upon the lading of the said bagg
and pieces of eight on board the said shipp, the Salvadore by this deponents order,
the Purser of the said Christian Cloppenburgh on board the said shipp. the said
Master then being on shoare at Cadiz signed three bills of lading of one tenor in
the name of the said Christian Cloppenburgh, which said three bills of lading this
Deponent had filled up with his owne handwriting, and seat them aboard expressely
to be signed for the said silver, one whereof remained on board the said shipp
and was, as hee beleiveth, found on board at the time of the said shipps seizure,
and was and is the very bill of lading now showne to this deponent: and the other
two bills of lading this Deponent received from the Barguier that had carried 
the said sylver on board the said shipp, and of which two bills of lading
this Deponent sent over land to Hamborough to the said Peter Tamm his wife
and the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.458v Annotate
and the other being the third bill of lading is remaining in this Deposition
at Dunquirke hee further saith that the bill of lading so now being in [...]
Registry of this Court together with the other hee of the same [deponent] [were]
are [...] and [...] and so had and done at [...] is contained [...]
knoweth being the person who filled up all the said three bills of lading with
owne hand writing, and sent them with the said sylver aboard, and well [...]
fixing of the Purser wherewith they are signed. And otherwise saving his 
foregoing and following [deponent] hee cannot depose: /

To the 5th and 6th articles of the said Allegation hee saith it is [now] that the
shipp the Salvadore with her whole [Cargaron] on being on her course from 
Cadiz towards Ostend after the lading of the said sylver or money about
her were surprised and taken by some of the shipps of the Commonwealth
and brought up into England, and beleeved the said bagg and [peeces] of [...]
therein contained did them come to the possession of the said [...] [...]
saith that the said 456 [peeces] of eight were by this deponent brought and 
provided and putt on board the said shipp the Salvadore with and out of the 
proceed of a containe Cargaroon of goods belonging to the said producent
paper, bedsteads, and silke stuffes and other commodities brought from [...]
by the producent in his said shipp the Coulden summ to Cadiz and there
expressely lost in this deponents hands to be sold and disposed off to the
best advantage, and the returne thereof to be by that deponent remitted [from]
there to the said producent or his Assigne which this deponent accordingly
and laded the said sylver or moneys at aforesaid for the [acc...] and [...]
sole adventure of the said producent, And saith that no person or persons in [...]
with this Commonwealth had or have any share or interest therein, [...]
hee deposeth upon containe knowledge grounded upon the reasons aforesaid
To the 7th hee saith the arlate Peter Tamm was and is a Hamburg [...]
and hath lived or hold his Constant residence there from his [...] and
a Subject of that free state, ad for sure was and is well knowne [...]
deposeth being a native of Hamborough and Cozen to the producent
To the last hee saith his foregoing deponent is true.

To the [...]

To the first negatively;/

To the hee saith hee hath from this respondents in [faurie] [knowne] the [...]
Tam who is his Unckle, and saith this respondent is the interrate [...]
both on [...] and aboard
who was in [...] of [...] with the interrate Cloppenburgh [...]
the shipp Salvadore was last at Cadiz And otherwise negatively;/

To the 3rd hee saith hee this respondent was upon the occasion in question farther to the
producent his Unckle who is now [...] for him. And otherwise referred him
to his foregoing deposition.

To the 4th hee saith the interrate Peter Tamm hath lived in the [Scheeps]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.459r Annotate
brooke in Hamborough with his family for ten yeares last and upwards
and for all that time this deponents settled aboad (this deponent being a Batchelor)
hath been in his ffathers house in the same street or place of Hamburgh:-/

To the 5. hee saith hee this deponent sent the said sylver on board the said shippp
in a barque by day time, the barquier whereof at his returne told this deponent that
the said Cloppenburghs Purser had received the same./

To the 6. he referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition. Otherwise negatively:

To the 7. 8. and 9th Interrogatories hee cannot depose, saving hee gave no order
to signe any other then the three bills of lading predeposed for the said sylver, which
bills hee saith are reall and true, and beleeveth not that any others were signed for the same

To the 10th hee saith hee is fully and absolutely Convinced in Conscience that
the 456. peeces of eight now Claymed doe really belong to the interrate Peter
Tam and to no other person in the world, and that the said shipp the Salvadore at
the time of her said seizure was directly bound for Ostend and no other
Port whatsoever whence the said moneys were to be remitted to the 
said producents wife at Hamburgh:/

To the 11th. 12. 13. 14. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions. And
otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the 15. hee saith hee is Cozen and Purser to the producent, And otherwise
negatively saving his foregoing deposition to which hee referreth./

To the 16. hee saith, hee receive dthe monies predeposed of severall Spaniards
at Cadiz for the goods predeposed sold unto them, And otherwise referreth himselfe
to his foregoing deposition:-/

To the 17. hee saith the said shipp the Salvadore, as hee beleeveth begann her
last outward voyage from Hamborough, but cannot otherwise depose:/

To the 18th. and 19. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition:/

To the 20:th hee saith there is no insurance made for the said sylver

To the 21:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition:/

To the 22:th hee saith the said shipp the Salvadore at the time of the lading of
the said sylver was under the Commannd of the fforts or Cannon or Cadiz:-

To the 23. hee saith hee this deponent received the two bills of lading predeposed
loose and otherwise referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition:-/

To the Interrogatories in the second place hee saith That hee knoweth
not the Lawes of Spaine concerning the Contents of theise Interrogatories./:-

Gaspar Tam [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Clarke and
Doctor Godolphin/
----
[THE ENTRY BELOW HAS BEEN CROSSED OUT]

The 7:th of December .1652:-

The Clayme of Claes Lues of Hamburgh for)
his goods in the shipp the Saint John of Hamburgh)
Joachim Meesters Master) taken by the shipp the)
Lymetwigg. Smith. ffrancklyn.)

Examined upon an Allegation given in on
behalf of the Claymer

vacat qud non
repetite, et [?XXX] sequitur.

jus./

Diederick Warnick of Hamborough Merchant
aged 25. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne
and examined saith as followeth videlicet.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.459v Annotate
To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That in or about
the moneth of August last past, the arlate Claus Luys by
this deponent his servant, being expressely sent from Hamborough for that purpose

[ADD DATA]

putt on board the shipp the Saint John arlate (whereof
Joachim Meesters arlate then was and now is master) then l;yeing at the
kay at Roane in ffrance three bales, two fatts, and one little Case severlly
marked with the marke, and respectively numbred with the numbers in the
margent, containing all and singular the goods wares and Merchandizes hereafter expressed
videlicet 26. grosse of bandstrings and handkerchef buttons, 16 dozen of necklaces
and bracelets, 10. table bookes, 1 dozen of masques, 10. dozen of trimming ribbons
for women, 5. dozen of severall little Cabinetts, 10. looking glasses, 34. dozen
of skreen fannes, 690. dozen ells of safety ribons, 166. douzen ells of satten
ribbon, 136. douzen ells of Copper ribbon, 3 peeces of black Lace or Cable, 60
douzen of plaine gloves 25 douzen of trund gloves, 26. long belts and 12.
wast belts. 13. pound of Copper galloone and lace, 15 peeces of black lace 12
peeces of white kantins, 8. douzen of wrought Calles or coyfes, 44 paires of
silke stockins, 21. douzen, 3 hatts. 2/ douzen of puffs for powder. 16 mark
of gold and silver hat bands, six handles of swords, 14 douzen of Copper and
black hatbands, 23. plumes, 8. pictures, 2. douzen of black hoods, 42. ells of
tabby, 3 douzen 1/2 of woollen stockins, 2. douzen of socks, 24. douzen ells of
loome lace, 6. douzen and a halfe ells of Chamlet say woollen, 3. douzen of gorgett
160. douzen ells of gold and silver braide 1400 douzen of penny broad ribbon
100. douzen ells of broader ribbon, 7. gross of small Copper buttons, and 8. rings
that piss water, 6 douzen of box combes, 10 douzen of horne combes, 18. douzen
of stockins and bootehose toppes of sarge, 12, grosse of scissors and knives
iron hilts for swords, 2 Candlestick, and 3. douzen of hawkeing baggs
be transported and carried in the said shipp from Roane to Hamborough
for the accompt and adventure of the said Claus Luys the producents
acoompt, which said Claus Luys at the time and times of the lading of all
and singular the goods predeposed aboard the said shipp was and now is and ought
to be the true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor of the same, And for such was
and is commonly accompted reputed and taken. The premisses this deponent
knoweth being servant to the said producent. and bu him expressely sento into
ffrance for the buying of goods wares and Merchandizes for the said producents
accompt, by whose order this deponent bought and laded the said goods for the
accompt predeposed. And otherwise saving his following depositions hee cannot
depose:./

To the second article and the schedule or bill of lading therein mentioned, and
showne to this examinate at the tyme of his examination hee saith, That
at or about the time of the lading of the bales fatts and Case predeposed, the
said Joachim Mooster in Roane in this deponents presence signed three bills
(of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.460r Annotate
lading all of one tenor for the same, two whereof hee delivered to the said John Roberts in this deponents presence
and the third the said Master kept to be transported in his said shipp to Hamburgh

To the third and fourth articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth 
That all and singular the goods predeposed were by this deponent bought and
provided in ffrance with the proper monies of the said producent remitted to
this deponent by bills of Excheange and otherwise and saith that the said producent alone, and
no other person whatsoever, did and doeth runn the hazard and advenure of
of all the said goods bought provided and laden as aforesaid. Which hee well
knoweth for the reasons aforesaid. And otherwise cannot depose, saving
his following depositions to which hee referreth./.

[ADD DATA]

To the 6th hee saith, That the said Claus Luis arlate for theise 10 yeares
last past, during which time this  deponent hath constantly served him, hath
constantly lived in Hamborough, and by common reort hath dwelt
there and was about 30. yeares last past and is a Burger and Subject of that Citie and State,a nd for 
such commonly accompted And otherwise cannot depose./

To the 7th hee saith his foregoing depositionw s and is true./

To the Crosse Interrogatories./

To the first hee saith hee cometh to be a Witnes in this Cause being thereunto
required by Mr ffrancklin Proctor for the Claymer, And hath no share in all or
any of the goods in question, nor hath himselfe assured for them or any of them
nor knoweth of any insurance made for the same, And otherwise negatively/:-

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.460v Annotate
Dutch miles from Hamburgh, and hath by common report lived in Hamburgh
for about 20. yeares before this deponent came to serve him./

To the 4.th hee saith hee was last at Hamburgh at Whitsuntide last, And [?about]
that time went from thence to Roane in ffrance for the occasion of buying the
goods now Claimed by his Masters order, and saith hee was never in ffrance
before this time, and sailed thither in the shipp the Saint George of Hamburgh
George Schoonmaker Master./

To the 5th hee saith, That hee this rendent bought all and singular the goods
predeposed of severall Merchants at Paris and Roane, and immediately upon
the buying thereof paid for the same with ready money, Which this rendent receaved
of Charles Morin a ffactor who, in regard this deponent understood not the ffrench
tongue, was employed to receive the said moneys at Paris upon bills of exchange sent from
Hamburgh by one Labiestraet a Burgher and inhabitant there bu the direction of
the producent, and saith hee this deponent received also of the said ffactor 1200
crownes which the producent had formerly remaining in the hands of his said ffactor
and this deponent saith hee also carried with him from Hamburgh to ffrance about
10. or 11 lb of Paternoster beades, some pruning hookes, and certaine boxes of
course silver which hee there also sold and disposed of for the said producents
accompt, and employed the proceed thereof towards payment of the goods in question
and saith the said bills of exchange were paid about the moneth of July last
past And otherwise saving his
deposition to the first article of this allegation to which hee referreth) hee cannot further depose./:-

To the 6: hee saith, That hee this rendent packed up all the goods in question by
him predeposed in his lodgeing at Paris and at the Custome howse [?XXX] and Roane, and
caused the marke to be sett upon them by those that helped him to packe
the same, and saith the same is the usuall marke of the said producent of
this deponents certaine knowledge by ten yeares experience n which time this deponent
hath seene severall goods of the same marke received at and transported from
Hamburgh for the said producents accompt at severall times, the particular time
ths deponent remembreth not/

To the 7.th hee saith, That upon the buying of the goods predeposed of severall
Merchants hee caused presently ffactories or accompts to be made respectively,
by the severall Merchants for the severall quantities hee bought of them in or about
the moneths of July and August last past, and sent the same over land by the
Poast to his said Master at Hamburgh where they are now as he beleeveth
and saith this deponent made an extract out of the said factories, and entred
a greate part of the said goods into a booke, which booke this deponent put into the
Case predeposed numbred 8, and saith hee remembreth not what the said goods
cost or of what Colour they were otherwise then as is predeposed. And otherwise
negatively./

To the 8.th hee saith the interrate Claus Lüys hath oftentimes caused
goods wares and Merchandizes to be bought both in Holland and ffrance
for his owne accompt, but beleeveth not any Correspondence or partnership [?XXXX
with any Dutch or ffrench subjects of the king of ffarnce or States
(Generall
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.461r Annotate
Generall of the United Netherlands, And saith hee doeth not knowe beleeve
or hath heard that the said Claus Luys doeth make use of his owne
name or any others to colour Hollanders or ffrenchmens goods, neither did this deponent
ever knowe him doe soe./

To the 9th hee answereth negatively to every part thereof/

To the 10th hee saith hee this rendent received order by word of mouth from the
said producent about the goods now Claimed videlicet about Whitsuntide last in
the house of the said producent at Hamburgh, hee ordered this depoennt to goe in
the said shipp the Saint George from Hamburgh to Roane and so to Paris in
ffrance, and there to buy for his said Masters accompt, such goods wares and
Merchandizes as hee should find to be most beneficiall for him, or to that
effect, which order hee saith and declared in the Hamburger or High dutch
speech, such as is ususall there./

To the 11th hee saith, That hee remembreth not at present the particular valewes
of the goods now in question, but beleeveth they were and are worth about 4000
french Crownes or silver Crownes And saith that one Mr Lunerole a Merchant here in London hath
order and authority from the producent to be assistant to this deponent for the
receovery of the goods in question, and saith hee this deponent receaved a letter from the
said producent Dated the 18th day of October last past
which hee received from Mr Richard Hands a Merchant here at London, wherein
the said producent intimated that full authority was by him and others given to
Mr Peter Vandeputt of London Merchant to act for them concerning the restitution
of their goods in the said shipp the Saint John of Hamburgh:/

To the 13. hee saith, the said shipp the Saint John was laden with severall sorts
of goods wares and merchandizes many of them of the same qualities with the
goods predeposed, and saith hee hath no share in any goods laden aboard the said shipp
And otherwise negatively referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 14, negatively to every part thereof.

dierich [?XXXXXche] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 8.th day of December 1653:-/ [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation

[?XXX]

2us/

Claus Vos of Hamborough merchant aged
.23. yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That in
the moneth of August last past this deponent being at Roane in ffrance
upon Merchanizing affaires did then and there see and observe that his
precontest dierich Warnicke together with one John Robert a ffactor
(residing
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.461v Annotate
residing at Roane aforesaid did lade and cause to bee laden on board the
shipp the Saint John of Hamborough (whereof the arlate Joachim Meesters
then was and now is Master) then lying at Roane one bale and one fatt marked with the

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marke in the margent, and containemig severall sorts of goods wares and
Merchandizes, videlicet ribons, gloves, stockins, hoods stuffes and other goods
the particulars whereof this deponent cannot declare, all or most whereof this
deponent saw bought of severall Merchants at Paris in the moneth of July
last or thereabouts and payd for by his said precontest with readie monie
presently after the buying of the same, and saith the said bale and fatt
of goods were so laden for the accompt and adventure of Claus Luys a
Merchant of Hamborough and Master to this deponents precontest, to be trans
ported in the said shipp from Roane to Hamburgh and there to be delivered
to the said Claus Luys for his owne accompt; Hee further saith That at
or about the time of the lading of the bale and fatt predeposed the saud John
Robert and dierick Warnicke told and acquainted this deponent at Roane, that
they had some daies before laden aboard the said shipp for the same accompt two bales and
one fatt of goods more marked with the marke aforesaid, containing also
severall sorts of ffrench goods and commodities, (a great part whereof this deponent
also saw bought and paid for by his said precontest at Paris about the said
moneth of July last past) together with one Case of goods for the said accompt
And accordingly the said John Robert and dierick Warnick then and
there shewed to this deponent three bills of lading of one tenor and of the marke aforesaid filled
up all saving the freight, upon which they said they were not then agreed
with the Master of the said shipp, and saith that they the said John Robert and
dierick Warnick then declared unto this deponent that all and singular the
parcells of goods predeposed and mentioned in the said bill of lading were then
aboard the said shipp laden and designed as aforesaid. And Otherwise
cannot depose, saving that for the reasons precedent and subsequent hee is
fully assured that the said Claus Luys from the time of the buying and lading
of the said goods by this deponents said precontest was and is the true and lawfull
Owner and Properietor of the same, and for such commonly accompted reputed
and taken, which hee declareth upon the reasons aforesaid/

To the second article and schedule therein mentioned and now shewne to this
deponent at the time of his examination hee saith and deposeth, That hee
this deponent was not personally present at the signing and firmeing of
the bills of lading allegate, but saith, That this deponent being a passenger aboard the
said shipp the Saint John in her Course from Roane towards Hamburgh
the said Joachim Meesters amongst other bills of lading concerning the
Cargazon of his said shipp, showed unto this deponent a bill of lading for the
parcells of goods marked with the marke predeposed, and signed with the said
Meesters his owne handwriting (as this deponent by reason of his frequent
observation of the said handwriting is fully and firmely assured) which
(said
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.462v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 9th day of December 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

3us/:-

Christian Bolden of Hamborough Merchant
aged 35. yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.463r Annotate
Roane in ffrance, and by one John Robert factor there caused to be laden and putt
on board the shipp the Saint John of Hamborough (whereof the arlate Joachim [?Masterr]
then was and now is Commander) then lying at the lay of Roane aforesaid
three bales two fatts and one little Case respectively marked with the markes and
numbers in the Margent to be transported and carried in the said shipp the Saint
John from their said place of lading to Hambrourgh for the accompt and upon the
adventure of the said Claus Luys and there for the said accompt to be delivered
unto him the sayd Luys the said bales fatts and Case being filled with stuffes
belts, gloves, hatts, ribbons and severall other sorts and kindes of ffrench goods
wares and merchandizes all for the accompt of the said producent, who at the time
of the lading aforesaid and till this present was is and ought to bee the true
and lawfull Owner of the said bailes fatts and Case and of the goods conteyned
therein, and for such was and is commonly accompted areputed and taken. The
premisses this deponent knoweth, for that this deponent went along in the shipp the
Saint George from Hamburgh about Whitsuntide last to Roane aforesaid, and
from thence to Paris with his precontest Derich Warnicke, where, in regard the said
Warnicke was not experienced in the ffrench language, this deponent was and went
many times along with him to be his assistant for the buying of the said goods
of severall Merchants in Paris for the said accompts and thereby saw the buying
of all or most part of the said goods, and saw the same or most part thereof paid for
by the said Derrick Warnick with readie monies for and on behalf of the said producent
And otherwise saving his following depositions hee saith hee cannot depose, saving this
deponent was personally present when the said John Robert in the name of the said
producent at or about the tyme of the lading of the goods aforesaid agreed with the
said Master for the payment of thirty rixdollars for the freight thereof from Roane to
Hamburgh, and for that this deponent saw all the said goods carried aboard the said
shipp, saving the said little case which this deponent saw made up in the house of the
said John Robert at Roanem ready to be brought aboard the said shipp to be trans
ported and delivered aforesaid.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.463v Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories/

To the first hee saith hee cometh to be a Witnesse in this Cause at the
instance of Mr ffrancklyn one of the Proctors in this Court, And
otherwise negatively not knowing of anyinsurance at all made upon the
goods in question or any part thereof.

[ADD DATA]

To the 4th hee saith hee went from Hamburgh as is predeposed about
Whitsuntide last about his owne Merchandizing occasions to Roane in
ffrance, were hee hath been severall times videlicet at Roane Diepe Saint Valery Nantes
Calles Paris and other places, but remembreth not how often

(To the 5th
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.464r Annotate
To the 5th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition to the first article
of the allegation, wherein hee hath declared as much as hee knoweth of the
demannds of this Interrogatorie. And further cannot depose:/.

To the 6th hee saith hee was not present at the packing of the goods interrate
but saw one of the said bailes opened in the Custome house at Roane And
visited by the Officer there, who after visitation caused the same to be made upp
againe. And saith hee hath not any more then upon the voyage in question
taken notice of the marke interrate. And cannot further depose./

To the 7th hee saith hee doeth not remember that hee ever saw any factors
for the goods in question, but that upon the buying thereof this deponent saw
severall bills of accompts given by the severall Merchants where the said goods
were severally bought unto the said Dierich Warnicke, at Paris, And otherwise
hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 8th hee saith hee knoweth not nor ever heard any thing thereof

To the 9th hee saith hee knoweth not nor hath heard that within the time
interrate any subjects of the States of the United Netherlands have come to
dwell at Hamburgh, or make use of any Hamburger names for the sourcing
of their goods from the English:-

To the 10th hee saith, That this deponent being at Paris in or about July last
and frequently an almost daily in  Companie with his precontest Derick
Warwick, this deponent saw severall letters which the said Warnick had received
from his said master with orders therein about buying of goods for his accompt
And otherwise cannot depose:/

To the 11th hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the 12th hee was a passenger in and aboard the shipp the Saint John interrate
at the time of her seizure./

To the 13th hee saith the said ship the Saint John is laden with brandewine
and piece goods and paper and that this rendent hath for his owne accompt
aboard the said shippe two bailes marked 'CB'. and filled with severall sorts
of french wares and merchandizes, and also one bagg marked with the Custome
house marke of Roane, and filled with the like goods, one portmantle with linnen
and some small curiosities that were given him in ffrance, and two flower potts
in silke embroiderie, and in a paper six ells of white and six of fading colour
satin And saith hee doeth not know or hath heard that any part of the
said shipps Cargo is for the accompt or upon the adventure of any Subiect or Subjects of the
King or States interrate./

To the 14th negatively to every part thereof/

Christian Bolden [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 12th day of december 1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Christian Bolden for his goods in)
the shipp the Saint John of Hamburgh (Mr Joachim)
Meesters) taken by the shipp the [Lymetwigg])
Smith ffrancklin)

Examined upon an Allegation on the
behalf of the said Claymer

Christian Bolden of Hamborough Merchant
(aged
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.464v Annotate
aged 35. yeeres or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet:/

To the first article and schedule therein mentioned hee saith and deposeth, That
in or about the moneth of August and September last past, hee this
deponent caused to be laden and putt on board the shipp the Saint John of
Hamburgh arlate (Joachim Meesters Commannder) then lying at the key at
Roane in ffrance and bound for the Port of Hamburgh, two bailes
of goods marked with the marke in the margent, and one
sack of bag of goods marked with the marke of the Custome house at
Roane aforesaid, containing severall sorts of goods wares and merchandizes
of ffrance, as plush Chambletts, taffety, tabby, bealts plumes of ffeathers
gloves hatbands and other Commodities, the particulars whereof this deponent
doth not at present remember, and one Trunke and all singular whereof
particular goods wares and merchandizes contained in the said trunke and
mentioned in the schedule annezed, videlicet one Cloake and doublet of ffrench
Chamblet worth 1 li 5 s one dozen of Barber scissors worth 4 s 5 d
Two black hilts for swords at 9 s a peece, worth 18 s ome Reame of
guilt paper worth 8 s seaven ells black Cipres in a paper which [?XXX]
cost 5s the ell amounting to 1 li 15 s All sorts of Taffeta Ribbon in a
paper worth 9 i 3 s ten dozen of black silke poynts worth 1 li 8 ss one
suit and Cloake of Spanish Cloath worth 5 li 6 s One Cassock with
silver buttons worth 4 li 10 s One Travellers bedd of redd Cloath worth
1 li 6 s one sword and be;lt worth 15 s one silver spoone worth 9 s one
silver hooke for a hatt worth 4 s ffower yards of white bone lace worth
12 s six shirts 4. payre of underdrawers 12 handcherchiefs. 12. bands, 1
wastecoate, 2. paire of welted stockins togeather worth 3 li 6 s. And more
one Portmantle with weareing linnen and some small favours and
curiosities bestowed upon this deponent in ffrance and twelve ells of blew and
white statin, and two flower potts wrought in silke embroidery all to be
transported and carried in the said shipp from Roane to Hamburg for
the sole accompt and adventure of this deponent and there to be delivered
to and received by this deponent for his owne accompt, Of all which  aforesaid
bailes, sack, Truncke, Portmantle, and all the goods wares and merchandizes
contayned therein, as also of the said Statin and flower potts embroydered that this
deponent sometimes before at and since the tyme of the ladeing of all and singular
the parcell of goods predeposed was is and ought to be the true and lawfull
Owner and Proprietor of the same. Which the premisses this deponent by
Vertue of his solemne oath declareth to be true and reall, being himselfe
the person who acted and transacted the same upon his peculiar accompt
and for his owne occasions. And otherwise saving his following deposition
hee cannot depose./:-

(To the second
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.465v Annotate
And otherwise cannot depose./

To the last hee saith his foregoing deposition is true:/

To the Crosse Interrogatories/

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee cometh of his owne accord to testifie
the trueth in this Cause and hath not made any assurance upon any of
his said goods, And saith hee hath as yet paid no Charges of
suiy concerning the same, but must, as hee beleeveth, pay such Charges [?XXX]
as shall be legally demannded of him. And for the rest of the Interrogatorie he
saith he hath in his foregoing deposition satisfied the demannds thereof./

To the second hee saith hee is a Native of Kiele in Holsteyn, and [?was]
there educated, and is a Subject of the free State of Hamburgh where
hee hath lived for all the time interrate./

To the 3. hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition./

To the 4th hee saith, hee departed from Hamnurgh about Whitsuntide
last and upon his Merchandizing occasions went for Roane in ffrance, and 
hath been severall times and at severall Ports and places there namely
at Roane, Nantes, Saint Varlery, Diepe, Callice and Paris, and other places
but how often and the particular places hee cannot further recite, and saith
hee went last from Hamburgh for Roane in the shipp the Saint George
George Schoonmaker of Hamburgh Master:-

To the 5. hee saith hee this rendent bought all the goods by him now [?Claymed]
from severall Merchants at Paris and Roane in ffrance, and paid for
the same shortle after the buying with readie monies part whereof this deponent
carried with himf from Hamburgh and part hee received at Paris
by bill of exchange upon Mr John Van Campen a Hamburgher factor who [?liveth]
in ffrance, which moneys this deponent had formerly paid at Hamburgh to one
Pauls Paulson a Burgher and Merchant of Hamburgh, who gave this deponent
a bill of exchenge to receive the said moneys, which the said Van Campen
accepted, and accordingly gave order for the payment thereof at Paris to this deponent
in July last past for this deponents owne accompt./

To the 6:th hee saith hee this deponent was present and assisting in the packig
of his said goods at the Custome Howses at Paris and Roane, and in his
owne lodging at those places, and saith the markes were sett upon his said
goods by those whom this deponent there imployed to assist him in the packing
of the said goods, and that the same is this deponents ordinary marke [?which]
hee hath used for severall yeares upon his merchandizing occasions./

To the 7.th hee saith That upon the buyeing of all and singular the goods
predeposed, This deponent himselfe being the Merchant that bought the same
did with his owne hand make up an accompt of the severall parcels contained
in the said two balets and pack predeposed, which accompt is now
remaining by and with his goods now Claymed in the sayd shipp the [?Saint]
(John
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.466r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

Christian Boldan [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 14:th day of Deember 1653:-

Examined upon the said Allegation:-

[?vacat]

2.us

Diederick Warnicke of Hamburgh Marchant
aged 25. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnesse
sworne and examined saith as followeth videlicet

To the first article and schedule therein mentioned of the said Allegation hee saith, That in or about the months
of August and September last past the arlate Christian Balden
did in this deponents sight cause to be laden and putt on board the shipp the
Saint John of Hamburgh (Joachim Meesters Commannder) then lying at the
kay at Roane in ffrance and bound for Hamburgh, two bailes of goods

'CB' [MARKE, LH MARGIN]

marked with the marke in the margent, and one sack or bagg of goods
marked with the marke of the Custome howse at Roane, the said bailes
and bagg conteinning severall sorts of goods wares and merchandizes of
ffrance, as gloves, hatbands, stuffes, bells and other Commodities.
all or most part of which wares and Merchandizes this deponent saith hee saw the said
Christian Bolden buy at Paris in ffrance in or about the moneth of July
(last
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.467v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 15th day of december 1653: [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said Allegation:

vacat.

3us.

Claus Vosse of Hamburgh Merchant aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts a Wittnes sworne and examined
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.468r Annotate
To the first article of the said Allegation and schedule therein mentioned hee saith That
hee this deponent in or about the moneth of July last past being at Paris in ffrance
about Merchandizing affaires, and there frequently conversant with the arlate
Christian Bolden a Merchant of Hamburgh, hee this deponent saw the said Christian
Bolden buy severall goods wares and Merchandizes of ffrance as gloves belts hatbands
stuffes ribbons and other goods, which the said Bolden caused to be packed up in

'CB' [MARKE, LH MARGIN]

two bailes markked with the marke in the margent, and in one sack upon which
this deponent then saw no marke, which goods this deponent saw ladn and putt upon a
Cart to be transported from Paris to Roane, and there as this deponent was then
informed by the said Claus (sic) Christian Bolden to be laden and putt on board the shipp the
Saint John of Hamburgh (Joachim Meesters Commannder) then lying at Roane, and
to be transported in the said shipp from thence to Hamburgh for the accompt and adventure
of the said Christian Bolden, And further saith That in or about the moneth of
August last past this deponent having done his affarires at Paris returned from
thence to Roane, where hee saw the said Christian Bolden cause to be laden aboard the
said shipp a Trunke with wearing apparrell and linnen and some ribbons,
[?Cypres], paper, scissors and other Commodities which this deponent doeth not particularly
remember nor the worth thereof, and saith the said Bolden then also caused to be
laden aboard the said shipp one portmantle (but what goods there were in the same
thsi deponent knoweth not) and a quantity of white and blew printed Statin in two
pieces, and two flower potts wrought in silke embroydery; The said goods being so
laden to be transported in the said shipp from thence to Hamburgh and there to
be received by the said Christian Bolden for his owne accompt, And saith the
said Christian Bolden was and is commonly accompted the true lawfull and sole
Owner and Proprietor of the said two bailes and sack, and of the said Turnke
and portmantle and the goods therein respectively contained, and also of the said
Statin and peices of embroydery. And otherwise saving his subsequent depositions
hee saith hee cannot depose:/

To the second article and schedule or bill or lading exhibited and showne to this
deponent at the time of his examination hee saith and deposeth, That about the later
end of August last past the said Christian Bolden at Roane aforesaid shewed
unto this deponent  three bills of lading all of one tenour filled up but not firmed, which hee then
declared to this deponent that hee intended to have firmed by the said Joachim Meesters
for his said two bales and the sack of goods predeposed, and this deponent firmely
beleeveth that the said Meesters did accordingly signe the said thee bills of
lading at Roane, and that the bill now showne unto him was and is one of the
said three originall bills of lading signed by the said Meesters and found aboard
the said shipp at the time of her seizure, and that the Contents thereof were
and are true and reall as hee stedfastly beleeveth, being well acquainted with
the handwriting of the said Meesters wherewith the said bill is firmed
And otherwise cannot depose./

(To the 3
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.469r Annotate
the Fukedome of Holsteyn, where hee had his education, and is at present a Subject
of the said ffree State of Hamburg where hee hath dwelt for about 7 yeares last
past, and for the most part of that time hath lived with one Dittelof Stollye a
Merchant and Burgher there./:-

[ADD DATA]

To the 4:th hee saith hee went last from Hamburgh for Roane aboard a Hamburgher
shipp (Claus van [?Vleysen ] Master) upin Merchandizing affaires by the firection of
Dittelof Stolly aforesaid, and saith hee was never before in ffrance:-/

[ADD DATA]

To the 13. he saith, the lading of the said shipp the Saint John consisted of brande
wyne and piece goods, all belonging to Hamburghers so farr as this deponent knoweth
beleeveth or hath ever heard./

To the 14 negatively to every part thereof.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.469v Annotate
The 16th day of December 1653/

The Clayme of Dittelof Stolly Merchant of)
Hamborough for his goods in the shipp the Saint John)
of Hambourgh, whereof Joachim Meesters was)
and is Master Smith ffrancklyn)

Examined upon the Allegation given in on the behalfe
of the said Claymer:/

jus

Claus Vosse of Hamborough servant
of the said Dittelof Stolly aged 23. yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined saith and
deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith, That in or about thje
moneths of August and September 1653. the arlate Dittelof Stolly
a Merchant of Hamburgh and producent in this Cause, did by [?XXX]
Joachim Collins a factor residing at Roanem and this Deponent whom the
said Dittelof Stolly had sent expressely about two moneth before from
Hamburgh about his Merchndizing occasions into ffrance, Did
ccause to be laden and putt on board the shipp the Saint John of
Hamburgh (Joachim Meesters then and now Master) then lying at the
kay at Roane and from thence directly bound for Hambugh, two
marks or bales of goods Np 3. 4. marked with the first mark
in the margent, and two bales or packs of goods No. 2. 5. marked with
the second marke in the margent, and one barrekk of horne combes No.
6 and marked with the said second marke, and five reames of paper
the said bailes or packes being filled with hatts hat bands belts
gloves ribbons stuffs and other sorts of wares and Merchandizes
of ffrance; And all the said bailes or packes and barrells and
goods therein severally contained and the said reames of paper so ladena
as aforesaid, were so laden expressely to be transported in the
shipp the Saint John from Roane to Hamburgh for the accompt and
upon the adventure of the said Dittelof Stolly

[ADD DATA]

To the second and two bills of lading therein exhibited as being in [?the]
Registry of this Court and now shewne to this Deponent at the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.471r Annotate
To the 6.th hee saith hee was present and assisting in te packing up of
the 4. bailes predeposed, two whereof were packed up in this deponents lodging
at the Iron Crosse in Saint Denis Streete at Paris, and two others at the
house of the said Nicholas Gourin, and saith that this deponent upon the
packing thereof caused the same to be marked by the usuall packers
and saith hee hath knowne the markes interrate for about 7. yeares
last past, and hath many severall times seene the same upon goods for the
said producents accompt, and particularly since his coming to London hath
sent from hence goods to Hamburgh for the accompt of the said producent
which were marked with the markes aforesaid.

To the 7:th hee saith the severall Merchants at Paris of whom hee bought the goods
now Claymed gave this deponent their severall accompts for the same, which this
deponent sent away over land to the said producent as invoyces or ffactories for
the same, and beleeveth the same are now at Hamburough in the said producents
Custodie, And saith there were not any ffactories made for the wares
and goods now Claymed otherwise then as aforesaid, And further cannot
Depose./

To the 8:th negatively. to every part thereof, saving the said Stolly hath
often used and still doeth use to trade with dutchmen and ffrenchmen, that
is to say in buying goods of them and paying for the same with readie monies
and not otherwise:/

To the 9:th negatively, And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 10:th hee saith he had order by word of mouth from the said producent
at Hambourgh, and a Hamburgher passe importing upon what occasion hee
was to goe fro ffrance, which passe he is readie to produce./

To the 11:th hee saith the goods now Claymed are worth about 4000. rixdollers
as hee conceiveth, and saith hee beleeveth that Mr Limerole a Merchant
here in London hath procuration to Clayme the sayd goods/

To the 12 hee saith hee was passenger in and aboard the said shipp at the
time of her seizure./

To the 12:th hee saith the said shipps lading consisted of brandewine and
piece goods, wherin hee hath no share, And otherwise negatively, referring
himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the 14:th negatively to every part thereof./
----
The 17th day of December 1653

Examined upon the said Allegation:/

vacat

2us

Diederich Warniche of Hamborough Merchant
aged 25 yeares or therabouts a Witnesse
sworne and examined saith as followeth videlicet


HCA 13/68 f.471v Annotate
To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That in or about the
moneth of August 1653. last hee this deponent being at Roane in ffrance upon
Merchandizing affaires, did then and there see and observe foure bales or packs of
goods, (whose severall markes this deponent remembreth not) and one barrell of [?XXXX]
and some reames of paper brought and laden on board the shipp the Saint John
of Hamborough arlate, (Joachim Meesters the Commannder) lyingat the [?XXX ?of]
Roane and bound for Hamborough, which said severall parcells of goods were
laden and putt on board the said shipp by one Joachim Collins a ffactor at Roane
and his precontest Claus Vosse, to be transported in the said shipp to Hamborough for
the accompt and risico of the arlate John Stolly the producent in this [?Caiuse]
and there to be delivered for his accompt to him or his Assignes, [?as ?the]
said factor and this deponents precontest then severally affirmed and declared to [?him]
And saith hee this deponent in or about the moneth of July last past was in
Companie with his said precontest at Paris in ffrance where hee saw him buy
severall french goods wares and merchandizes of severall french men there and
saw him pay for the same with readie moneys, the said goods consisting in hatts [?XXXX]
ribbons gloves belts and other Commodities, and saith hee this deponent saw part
of the said goods packed up in two packs or bailes at the said Claus [?Vosse]
his lodging in Paris to be sent from thence to Roane as accordingly they were and
laden for the accompt aforesaid; as the said de Vosse both at the time of the
buying and lading of the said goods affirmed to this deponent And otherwise saving
his subsequent deposition hee saith hee cannot depose./

To the second hee saith, That hee was not present at nor aw the signing of
the bills of ladeing arlate and now showne to this examinate at the time
of his examination, but in regard hee is well aquainted with the hand
writing of the said Joachim Meesters, and had bills of lading signed by
him for such goods as hee this deponent at Roane caused to bee laden aboard
the said shipp for Hamburgh, hee is in Conscience persuaded that the
two bills of lading now shewne unto him were firmed at Roane by the
said Master with his owne hand, and that the Contents thereof were
and are reall and true. And otherwise cannot depose/

To the 3. and 4th. articles hee saith, That hee this deponent was [?present]
at Paris, when the said Claus Vosse received monies by [?various]
letters of exchange from the said producent, at the howse and from the [?XXX]
of one Nicholas Gourrin a Merchant at Paris, and also saw the [?XXX
said Clause Vosse drew monies upon the said producent from another
Merchant at Paris (whose name hee remembreth not) with [?which]
the said Claus Vosse paid for the goods and merchandizes there
bought and provided by him upon the accompt aforesaid, And [?hee]
in Conscience is verily persuaded, That the said goods wares and
merchandizes were really bought, and laden aboard the said shipp
for the accompt and upon the adventure of the said Detlef [?XX]
and that no other person whatsoever hath any share or interest
(therein
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.472r Annotate
therein,. And further cannot depose./

To the 5.th hee saith it is notorious, That the said shipp the Saint John beingin
her Course from Roane towards Hamburgh with her lading was surprized
and taken by a private man of warr of this Nation and brought into
the Port of Dover, where shee now is, as hee beleeveth, And further canot
depose./

To the 6:th hee saith hee hath knowne the arlate Dittelof Stolly for 10.
yeares las past or thereabouts an inhabitant Burger and Merchant
residing in Hamburgh, and a Subject of that free State, and for such the
said Sittelof Stolly was and is well knowne and commonly reputed. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 7.th he saith his foregoing deposition is true./:-

To the Interrogatories:-/

To the first hee saith hee cometh to be a Witnesse in this Cause at he
instance of Mr. ffrancklyn Proctor for the producent And otherwise
negatively, And further cannot depose:-/

To the second hee saith hee is a Hamburgher by birth and habitation,
and hath for 10. yeares last or thereabouts lived there with one Claus
Luyth a Merchant,/ and is a Subject of that State./

To the third hee saith hee hath knowne the interrate dittelof for about 10.
yeares last as aforesaid, and saith hee is accompted a Native of Remsburgh
in the Dukedome of Holsteyn And otherwise referreth himselfe to his fore
going deposition./

To the 4:th hee saith hee came last from Hamburgh about Whitesuntide last
and sailed thence to Roane in ffrance in the shipp the Saint George of Hamborough
(George Schoomaker Master) about his Master Claus Luys his occasions, and
never was in ffrance before./

To the 5:th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition to the j. 3. and 5th
articles of the allegation in this Cause, wherein hee hath, as uch as hee cann
saisfied the demands of this Interrogatorrie./

To the 6:th hee saith, hee hath of late since his coming for London seene and
observed some parcells of goods marked with the markes predeposed, which goods
were here bought by his precontest for the said Stolly his accompt, and sent
to him at Hamburgh. And otherwise saving his foregoing deposition hee cammpt
Depose./

To the 7.th hee saith that hee this deponent being frequently in Companie at Paris with his pre
contest, did severall times see severall accompts or ffactories concerning such goods
as the said Claus Vosse bought there as aforesaid, which accompts or ffactories
the said Claus Vosse declaring to this deponent hee then intended to send in letters over
Land to the producent at Hamburgh And further cannot depose:-/

To the 8th and 9:th negatively:-/

To the 10:th negatively for his part, and otherwise cannot depose./

To the 11:th hee knoweth nothing thereof/

To the 12:th hee saith he was not in nor aboard the said shipp the Saint John
(at
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.472v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 24th day of December 1653

Examined upon the said Allegation:/

Vacat

3us

Claus Balden of Hamburgh Merchant aged
35. yeares or thereabouts a Wittnesse sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.473r Annotate
deponent is fully conveinced in Conscience, that the said Dittelof Stolly was is
and ought to bee the true lawfull and sole Owner and Proprietor of all and
singular the parcells and goods therein contained as aforesaid. And further cannot
depose.

To the second and schedules or bills of lading thereby exhibited and now showne to
him this exannate hee saith and deposeth, That hee was not present at the
firming of the said bills of ladung, but saith that Joachime Mester the Skipper shortly after
hee had firmed, showed two bills of lading ready firmed by him for the sayd goods, one
of which bills this deponent well remembreth was marked with the marke aforesaid,
and the marke of the other hee remembreth not, And saith, that hee this deponent
being well acquainted with the usuall firme of the said Joachim Meesters, is in
Conscience verily perswaded that the bills now showne unto him were and are
two of the originall bills of ladeing firmed by the said Joachim Meesters with his
owne hand at Roane

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.474r Annotate
A.1.

The 28 of december 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The keepers et cetera against the Patriarch)
Jacob foresaid)

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

3.

Hence Meimers of Hamborough Mariner aged 43 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the first second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
about five yeares since hee this deponent upon the exchange in hamborough
was present with Daniel Brandes, John [?Novius]. Adolph Sumpton and
Baselius van Borstell and Claus Colbrand (nowe master of the Partriarch
Jacob arlate) and heard them conferring together about a shipp the
said persons, Brands, [?Novis], Sumpton and Van Borstell had ordered the said
skipper to build for their accompt in holland and about the chardge and cost thereof,
and heard them say that the cost should be about 10000 gilders for the hull,
and soe much the said skipper Claus Colbrand said was demannded by a
master builder, and the said persons then and there gave the said Claus order
to proceede in the building and buying the said shipp for their accompt who
thereupon departed for holland, and as this deponent hath often heard
caused the said shipp to be built and named her the Patriarch Jacob and
tooke the commannd of her to the use of the said merchants, who have
ever since bin accompted her owners, and the said shipp hath ever since
bin commonly accompted and said to be a hamburger shipp, and to be
belonging to hamborough, And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving that
the said Claus Colbrand is master of the said shipp at present, which hee
knoweth because hee came from Cadiz this voyage in her company.

To the 4 hee cannot depose.

To the 5th not examined.

To the 6 and 7. hee saith that in July last past and shortly before this deponents
departure from hamborough for Cadiz with his shipp the Crowne
Imperiall the wife of the said Claus Colbrand meeting with this deponent at
hamborough, said, Neighbour, I would I had sooner had notice of your
being freighted for Cadiz, for then I would by you have sent the [?fXXXXX]
and provisions to my husband (speaking of the said Claus) for his shipp
the Patriarch Jacob for Cales, which I have nowe laden in hanse Schoonback
who is thither alsoe bound, and as hee heard, the said
Schooback in his passage for Cadiz was taken by ffrench sea Rovers, and
soe the said goods lost. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 8 hee saith that the said Daniel Brands and the rest of the foresaid
owners, have and doe from time to time take upon them to be and are
by merchants and others at Hamborough commonly looked upon and
reputed as owners of the said shipp, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 9 10. and 11 hee saith the said shipp the Patriarch Jacob lay this summer
three monethes and upwards in the bay of Cadiz neere this deponents said
shipp, and all that space of this deponents sight and knowledge wore
the Hamburger colours and noe others, and it was commonly said that
shee came thither from haver de Grace, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 12 hee cannot depose

To the 13 hee saith hee hath knowne all the said persons arlate from
his youth to be living in Hamborough, where they were and are subiects
and Burghers, and for such commonly accompted.

To the Interrogratories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee was borne and hath lived alwaies at
Hamborough, And otherwise negatively.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.474v Annotate
To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the said Claus Colbrandt
to have bin living in Hamborough (the place of his
nowe dwelling) for all the time since this deponents youth namely
for thirtie yeares and upwards, of which place hee is repited a native
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 3. 4. and 5 hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition, and
otherwise cannot depose.

[?XXXX ?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

.4.

Hendrick Luck of Hamborough Mariner, master of the
shipp the Saint Paul of Hamborough, aged 36 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first, second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and
deposeth that hee well knoweth the arlate Claus Colbrand master of
the shipp the Patriarch Jacob arlate, and well knoweth that in the yeare
1648 hee the said Claus sold a vessell of hamborough a fflute whereof
hee was master and whereof Daniel Brands, Adolph Sumpter,
John Norris, and Basil Van Bustle of Hamborough were
owners, who then gave him order to goe and build a shipp in Holland
for their accompt, whereof hee this deponent came to take
more notice being alsoe a skipper of the same citie and well
acquainted with him and his said owners, and being told of and
then made acquainted with the said order  for the said shipps
building: and saith that the said Claus Colbrand thereupon departed
for Holland and as this deponent hath often heard and as the common
report was at Hamborough caused the said shipp the Patriarch Jacob
to be built in Holland for the said accompt of the said merchants [?before]
named, according to their said order. And further saith that [?XXX]
the said shipp hath bin commonly accompted a Hamborough shipp and 
belonging to the said producents, (and to the said port) where hath
bin ever since and are commonly accompted her owners, and the said
Claus hath ever since bin and is commonly accompted master thereof and
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fourth hee cannot depose.

To the 5th not examined.

To the 6 and 7th hee saith that about Whitsuntide last there
were by order of the said owners laden at Hamborough aboard the shipp of [?XXX ?XXX]
bound for Cadiz for the use of the said shipp the Patriarch Jacob then
lying at Cadiz and to be delivered to the said Claus Colbrand [?XX]
certaine provisions of victualls ad some furniture, which hee knoweth
because hee this deponent was then at Hamborough and being [?XX XXX]
for the said port of Cadiz with the shipp the Saint Paul of
Hamborough (whereof hee is master) hee came to take the [?more] [?XXX]
the premisses, and saith that the said shipp of[?Hance] [?Sparbeck]
(whereof his sonne in ;awe went master) was as this deponent [?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.475r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 29th of December 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The claime of Lorenzo Pastana Martins)
for his goods iin the White Unicorne (Claus)
Albertson master) taken by Captaine Kendall

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the said Lawrenzo Pastana
Martins.

Fra:)
[?XXXX]) dt.
~~~
Claus Albertson of Stockholme in Sweden Mariner
Master of the said shipp the White Unicorne aged 45
yeares or thereabouts, sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.476r Annotate
To the 11. 12. 13 and 14 hee referreth himselfe to his foreggoing deposition and to the
said bills of lading and otherwise cannot answer, saving there is warr betwixt
ffrance and Spaine.

To the 15 hee saith hee cannot depose, but beleeveth that a shipp bpound
from Lisbone for ffrance and having a charter partie aboard specifying the said shipp
to be freighted by a Portuguese and laden for his account to dischardge in ffrance
will be made prize being taken by the Spaniards.

claes albertson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clarke and Godolphin
----
The 9th of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Claime of Nicholas Cordes and others)
for the ffortune of Lubeck Nicholas Neyman)
master, and for the goods in the same.)

Examined upon an allegation given on the
behalfe of the said Cordes and
others.

1us.

Nicholas Neyman of Lubeck Mariner
Master of the said shipp aged 46 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that for the
space of a yeare last past or thereabouts the producents Nicholas Cordes, William [?WhiX]
Albert Saffe and company of Lubeck have bin the true and lawfull owners
and proprietors of the said shipp the ffortune and of her tackle and furniture
and soe are at this present save only that in the moneth of July last
past hee this deponent being owner of three eighths and one sixteenth part
of the said shipp, sold the said 16th part to the arlate Andrew Desall of
Riga, who hath ever since bin and is the true and lawfull owner of the said
part. And saith the said shipp was built at Lubeck and hath ever since
belonged to that port, and was soe built by her said owners of Lubeck
and finished in or about the moneth of May last annd that this is her
first voyage, All which hee knoweth to be true being a part builder, and
a part owner, and master of the said vessell, and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that
in or about the moneth of January last past the said Nicholas Cordes and
company of Lubeck owners of the said shipp sent her under the conduct of
this deponent to Riga consigned to the said Andrew Desall, with
letters and orders for the said Andrew to lade her with Clapboards for the account
of the said owners, and that the said shipp arived at Riga in or about the
beginning of July last past, where the said Andrew Desell accordingly laded
her with clapboards for ffrance for the said owners their accompt, and
gave this deponent order to sel the same at Rochell or Saint martins, and
with the proceede thereof there lade the said shipp with salt to be brought
back into the East countrey, all for the ioynt accompt of the said owners, who
were the sole proprietors of the said clapboards, and that noe other
person had then any interest thereon; and saith that in persuance of
the premisses hee this deponent departed with the said shipp and lading for
ffrance, and at Saint Martins sold the said clapboards for 52 gilders
per hundred to one Mr Bowdewin there dwelling, of whom hee this
deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.476v Annotate
deponent bought the said shipps present lading of salt with the said proceeds
at or after the rate of 310 gilders for each hundred, being in all seaven
hundred of salt or thereabouts, for the accompt aforesaid, and was sailing
with the same for the East countrey to be delivered there for the said accompt[?s]
but was met with and carried up to ffalmouth by a frigot of this
Commonwealth, And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving the said
[?Barndrini] is a greate dealer in salt.

To the fourth article hee saith and deposeth that the arlate Claes [?CXX]
was none of the shipps company nor went in her from Lubeck nor
was present at the alading of the said Clapboard, nor went from Riga in
the said shipp to Saint Martin, nor did this deponent ever see him till
this deponent came with the said shipp to Saint Martins as aforesaid, when
having about halfe delivered the said shipp, and meeting there with the
said Claus who was destitute of imployment by meanes of a hamborough
shipp wherein hee came thither her being there cast away, hee this
deponent ther hired and shipt him to goe boatswaine of his said shipp
and this was about the middle of October last past, after that this
deponent had soe made sale of the said clapboards to the said [BXXXX]
who before such his buying the same there of this deponent, had nt
any interest whatsoever therein, but this deponent being therewith
instructed was at libertie to have sold them to whom hee pleased [?XX]
such sale made to the said Bourderway, And therefore hee saith that hee
be by the said [?Croyer] deposed or said in his examination to be
by him deposed as is in the article mentioned, the same is contrary to the truth as hee
saith, and likely to have happened by misunderstanding him for
this deponent could never finde or perceive that hee the said [?Croyer]
understood English, but spake and understood only the East countrey
language, And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot depose.

To the 5th hee saith that hee this deponent at his examination and [?XX]
the truth was said hee was imployed by Nicholas Cordes, and did 
[?XXX]
Cordes, and said that Andrew Dessell of Riga  (and not Andrew
Thessell of Rey) was part owner and lader of the said clapboards and
to the truth, and that if it be otherwise set downe, it is [?erratum]

To the Interrogatories

To the first hee saith hee tooke chardge of and came aboard the said shipp
as master upon her fitting and furnishing at Lubeck after her said building
referring himselfe to his foregoeing deposition.

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the said Nicholas Cordes, William
White and Albert Saffe about 20 yeares, during which they have always
lived in Lubeck, and as hee beleeveth were all borne therem and that [?XXX]
hee hath knowne the said Andrew Dassell to be and to have bin of Riga for theise
eight yeares last and there inhabiting for all that time, and as hee beleeveth
the said Andrew is a native of Riga, and that the said persons respectively
keep their wives and families in the said respective places.

To the third hee saith that besides the said Cordes, White and Saffa, hee
this deponent, Joachim [?vrXXXXe], Detcliffe [?Deales] and Gunert [?GXXXXX]
all of Lubeck, natives, and houskeepers there and have lived there all their
times, were alsoe builders of the said shipp and were and are owners
thereof
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.477r Annotate
thereof, and for the particularitie of the said owners their parts, hee saith
that the same were and are as followeth videlicet the said Vlaus Cordes a 16th part
William White an eighth part, Albert Saffa a 16th part, this deponent
three eighth parts, Joachim [?VrXXXX] an eighth part, detcliffe [?decles]
an eighth part [?Gunert] Givertson a 16th part, and Andrew Dostell
a 16th part. And otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing
deposition.

To the fourth and 5th hee saith that the said shipp cost building and
fitting 7700 markes Lubecke or neare thereabouts, and the said Andreas
Dostell for the said 16th part bought of this deponent paid 465 marks
Lubecke. And this deponent was specially imployed in the oversighting
and furthering the said building and defraying the chardges thereof.

To the 6th negatiely, saving his foregoing deposition, whereunto hee
referreth himselfe.

To the 7th hee saith hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition
And otherwise cannot answer.

To the 8th hee saith hee carried outwarss (besides the said Clapboard for
the owners) about 3000 pipestaves and 100 pounds of Cordovan leather
which were forhis this deponents owne accompt, which pipestaves hee sold
for 60 gilders per thousand, and the Cordovan for 2 gilders the pound
And saith that hee had aboard at the time of the seizure (besides the said
salt) 6 peeces of brandewine, tenn hogsheads vinegar and 20 hogsheads of
wine, all the said brandewine, vinegar and wine for the
accompt of this deponent and company of the said shipp, which brandewine
cost them 70 gilders the hogshead, the vinegar 15 gs 1/2 per hogshead and
the wine 14 1/2 the hogshead, and that the said salt, and other goods are
fully paid for, and that nothing remaines thereof unpaid.

To the 9th hee saith that the said brandewine, vinegar and wine were
the proceede of the said pipestaves and Cord[?evain], and some of his freight
whereiwth hee furnished himselfe and company to buy and pay for the
said brandywine, vinegar and wine, And otherwise hee referreth himselfe
to his foregoing deposition.

To the 10th negatively.

To the 11th hee saith the saud salt and other goods seized are of the growth
and make of ffrance.

To the 12th hee saith hee never knew the said [?Bordeway] before this present
voyage, and that hee the said [?Bordeway] hath noe part or share
whatsoever in the said wine or other goods, And otherwise hee cannot answer

To the 13th hee saith hee was borne at Baerdt in Pomerland, and hath
for theise 25 yeares last lived in Lubeck and bin a maried man there for
16 yeares of the said time, And saith that the speedinesse of the
restitution of the said goods will availe him much, in respect
of the chardge hee [?staires] at, and that them hee may prosecute his
voyage. And otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition.

To the 14th negatively.

To the last hee saith that there hath not bin any money taken up
upon bottomrie since the beginning of the said voyage. And otherwise hee
cannot depose./

Class [?XX] [?Man] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.477v Annotate
The 12th of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Claime of Melchior Speke[?r] and)
othres of Hamborough for the shipp the)
Sphera Mundi of Hamborough and goods]

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the said claimars.

Rp.

.1.

Garret Derrickson of Hamborough Mariner
Master of the said vessell, aged 44 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]

made answer that his vessell was a free vessell, bought in England
and that hee would not for five times the value of an ordinary freight
meddle with  any unfree goods, for that hee might thereby indanger his
shipp, incurr his owners displeasure, and bring ruine upon himselfe,
whereupom the said Anthony ffreson hagen assured this deponent with
many protestations that the goods and lading by him meant and
spoken of for this deponents freight were all for hamburgers accompts
and belonging to such hamburgers as lived in and were freemen of the
said citie of hamburough, and that hee was as cautious to lade in a free
shipp, as this deponent was of free goods, and would be sure that there
should noe other goods be laden but such as belonged to hamburgers of [?hamburg]

least the lading might be endangered, and upon those conditions and
assurances this deponent undertooke the said freight and received the
said goods aboard, being the same nowe seized, which goods hee saith
were and are consigned for hamborough, there to be delivered, for the
accompt of hamburgers there resident, referring himselfe to the
bills of lading by him signed for the same, The premisses hee deposeth
being master of the said shipp, and otherwise hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith there was not any Charter partie made for the
present voyage, but the freight is according to the bills of lading.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.478r Annotate
To the fifth he saith hee received noe money or freight of any of the said
laders, hee was and is to receive his freight at hambrorugh of the persons mentioned
in the bills of lading, and according to the said bills.

To the 6th hee saith hee came to [Painbeufe] on or about the nineteenth of
October last, and began to take in his aid lading the 4th of November last.

Repeated before doctors Clarke and Godolphin.

Schipper Gerredt Dircks [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 12th of January 1653.

[?Con] the Pilot Cowe Martin)
Andries [?master].)

Rp.

Thomas Tayte of London Mariner, Commannder of
the shipp the Margaret and Elizabeth of London, aged 30 yeares or thereabouts, and Samuel [?Venner]
Chirurgeon of the said shipp aged 24 yeares or
thereabouts, sworne before the right worshippful William
Clarke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie, say
and depose by vertue of their oathes.

That the said shipp the Margaret and Elizabeth being bound for
Newfound land and having a Commission of Marque against
the enemies of this Commonwealth, in or about the moneth of
July last past, met at sea with a ffliboate
of Rotterdam named the Pide Cowe, Martien Andries master laden
with salt bound (as the said master said) for Rotterdam there to dischardge,
and tooke and seized the same, and carried the said ffliboate and lading
to Newfoundland. And say that shee proved soe leakie, that for
the preservation of the said salt the said Commannder and company were
faine to land and dispose of the same at Newfound land, there being
noe possibilitie through the extreame leakinesse aforesaid to bring
the said salt hether. And further that the said salt soe landed was and
amounted to eight hundred fourtie eight hogsheads or thereabouts of
ffrench salt, comming from Berneuf, and
that there is fifteene in the hundred allowed for [?housing] the said salt,
besides that there was eighteene pounds sterling paid for the lading
thereof./

Acknowledged and
repeated in Court before
the Judges

Tho: Tayte: [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Sam: Venner [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 13th of January 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of Mr Westcombe)
touching the Charitie)

Rp.

Martin Westcombe of London Merchant aged 28 yeares
or thereabouts sworne before the right worshippful William 
Clarke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes, Judges
of the high Court of the Admiraltie saith and deposeth
by vertue of his oath

That according to the advise received by this deponent from his factor John
Westcombe resident at Bayon in ffrace, hee the said John there bought about
three
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.478v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

14 January 1653.

On the begakfe of Mr Boone)
touching the Genua Merchant')

Richard Campian of London wine Cooper aged 25 yeares
or thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull William
Clarke and John Godolphin doctors of Lawes Judges of
the High Court of the Admiraltie, saith and deposeth
by virtue of his oath

[ADD DATA]
----
The 14th of January 1653

The claime of the said Cordes for the)
ffortune of Lubeck)

Examined upon the fore said allegation

Rp

Harman Groatjan of Lubeck Mariner, aged 26
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined as
aforesaid

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.479r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 14th of January 1653.

Pickering and company imployers of the)
three Sisters, against the Saint John)
Michael Jacobson master)

'Michael Jacobson' of Tunsborough in
Norway mariner master of the said shipp
the Saint John aged 24 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.480r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

2.

David Blide of the Weemes in Scotland Mariner, aged
22 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.481r Annotate
To the 9th hee saith that the said shipp having by storme lost her mast and 
danish flagge before her going into Tervier, had noe flagge or colours
when shee was seized and that shee was seized at sea North of Yarmouth

To the 10th he hee cannot depose.

To the last hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition and cannot otherwise
depose.
----
The same day. [CENTRE HEADING]

4

Albert Oldson of Tonsborough in Norway Sailor
aged 20 yeares of thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the first and second Interrogatories he saith and deposeth that he hath
served in and bin one of the common men of the shipp the Saint John
about 10 weekes last and came first aboard her at Tunsborough to which
port shee belongeth, and that Jacob Michaelson and John Johnson
of Tonsborough, Norweigians, and subiects of the Kinge of Denmarke
were and are owners of the said shipp, which hee knoweth being of the 
same place and seeing them from time to time set out thence as owners.

To the third hee saith the master of said shipp Michaell Jacobson
was and is of Tonsborough aforesaid, and sonne of the said Jacob
Michaelson, and this deponent is of the same place, and that all the
Company of the said shipp are North-men, saving one who is
a Scots man, named David Blide, and saving him the sayd David and
all her shipps company are subiects of the Kinge of Denmarke.

To the 4th hee saith hee hath knowne the said owners at Tonsborough
from this deponents childhood, and otherwise negatively.

To the 5th hee saith the said ships lading at the time of her seizure consisted
in Linseed, [?soape], onyons, and some other things, all which were laden at
Tervier in Zealand by certaine Scots, freighters of the said vessell, and
to be carried and dischardged at Leith in Scotland for the said Scots accompts
And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving hee knoweth they were to goe
thither and to dischardge there, hee this deponent being hired only for
that port.

To the 6th hee cannot depose.

To the 7 hee saith hee was never in holland nor ffrance nor ever
in Zealand before this voyage, and otherwise hee cannot answer saving as
aforesaid.

To the 8 hee saith hee was hired at Tervier to goe with the said shipp and
lading to Leith, where the voyage was to end, and that hee being Cooke
had noe certaine hire allotted.

To the 9th hee saith they had noe flagge or [?vandles] when they were seized
having before lost their danish flagge, and that the seizure was made
Northward of Yarmouth.

To the 10th hee cannot depose.

To the 11th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and cannot
otherwise depose.

'H' [MARKE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.481v Annotate
The 23th of January 1653

On the behalfe of Mr)
Pyckering and company)

dt.

James Downing of Leith in Scotland Mariner aged
29 yeares or thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull
William Clerke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie saith and
deposeth by vertue of his oath

[ADD DATA]
----
The 23th of January 1653.

Thomas James of the parish of Saint Giles Cripplegate
London Merchant aged 37 yeares or thereabouts, and Thomas
LLoyd of the parish of Saint James Dukes Place London
Tailor aged 48 yeares or therabouts, sworne before the
right worshippfull William Clarke and John Godolphn
doctors of lawes, Judges of the high Court of the
Admiraltie, say and depose by vertue of their oathes

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.482r Annotate
The 23 of January 1653.

Blinckinsop and company against the)
Swann of Memblick Cornelius)
Claeson master)

Cornelius Claeson of Madenblick in Holland
Mariner, master of the said shipp aged
35 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]

To the second hee saith that the lading of the said shipp at the time of her
seizure consisted in wheate, rie, barley and buck wheate, namely 25
lasts of buck wheate, 14 lasts of barley, 45 lasts of rie, and 42 lasts 
of wheate, and that there were also 38 Prussia deales
and 20 other deales aboard, all which corne and deales were
laden at Dantzike and bound to be delivered at Amsterdam, and were
and are all belonging to the said owners, saving 30 of the said Prussia deales which
were and are belonging to a merchant whose name hee knoweth not,
living in Amsterdam

[ADD DATA]
----
The 24th of January 1653

Examined upon the allegation given in on the
behalfe of the said Chilton and company

Chilton and company against the)
Greate Christofer, and against Barker)
and others. Smith. Suckly.)

dt. jus.

Captaine Samuel Titsell of Redriff in the
County of Surrie Commander of the shipp
the three Sisters, aged 33 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.482v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 25:th day of January 1653

Against William James aforesaid)
touching two Cables and a Kedge Anchor)
taken out of the Mary of [?Mosse])

Examined upon the said Articles ministred against the said
James

5tus

Major John King of Wapping in the County of Middlesex [?XXX] aged
51 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth

To the second third and 4.th articles of the articles in this cause administred
saith and deposeth. That hee this deponent being a Merchant and useing the
Eastland trade and haveing his factors and correspondents resident in [?Norwaye]
for the carryeing on of the said trade had and receaved letters from [?XXX]
in Norway from his correspondents there beareing date in or about the moneth of
July

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.483v Annotate
the same day Examined upon the said Articles

Rp.

6us

Edward Branston of the parish of Saint Mary Matsellon
alias Whitechappell Ropemaker aged 47. yeares or thereabouts
sworne and Examined. deposeth

To the fourth article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth That hee this
deponent being a Rope maker by profession doeth knowe and very
well remember that in the moneths of August, September and October
last past, Cordage from the size of thirteene Inches in thicknesse
to 6 or 5 Inches thicke was in and about London usually and comonly
sold for the somme of forty eight shillings sterling per hundred, and that
much hee saith the same was well worth and did commonly yeild this
deponent and others useing to deale in that Comoditye. And saith that
a good Cable of 24 C weight or thereabouts about the tyme aforesaid was
worth the said somme of forty eight shillings per hundred and a kedge
Cable if good was as hee saith well worth the said rate oer hundred. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the rest hee is not Examined by direction of the producent.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first second 3d 4th 5th . 6. and 7th Interrogatories hee cannot depose

To the 8th hee saith hee cometh requested by Captaine James day to tell
the truth of what hee knowes in this matter, which hee hath done as
is above specified. and for soe doeing doeth not expect any thing from any
person whatsoever. And further cannot depose.

Edward Branson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
the same day Examined upon the said Articles

Rp.

7us.

William Rubye of Gunfeild in the parishe of Stepney in the
County of Middlesex Rope maker aged 48 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and Examined deposeth.

To the fowrth article of the Articles in this cause Administred hee saith anddeposeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.484r Annotate
27 January 1653.

Touching the perishablenesse)
of the goods of the Hope)

Rp.

Adam Woolley of London Merchant aged 25 yeares or
thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull William Clerke
and John Godolphin doctors of lawes, Judges of the
high Court of the Admiraltie saith and deposeth
by vertue of his oath.

That on the three and twentieth day of this instant moneth of
January 1653 hee this deponent accompanied with John Tookey
of Dover distiller of stronge waters went aboard a certaine shipp
named the hope (whereof Martin Suer was master) then being in
Dover harbour laden with wines, syroups stronge waters and peece goods
lateley seized by the ffortune (William ffinch Captaine) a private man
of warr, and viewed the said lading in respect of the condition
thereof, and found the same to be much moistened and heated by
reason of the vapours issuing or proceeding from the said strong
waters lying under the said peece goods; which peece goods
hee saith have sustained much dammage thereby, and daily growe
worse and worse, and that both the said goods and stronge waters
if not speedily landed and disposed of will be utterly spoiled.
And further deposeth that Mr John Collingwood, Richard
Jacobs, hans Tiddiman and Michael de haese of dover being
amongest others Commissioners appointed by authoritie of this Court
to viewe and inspect the said shipp and lading, went to the said
shipp to that purpose and accordingly viewed and inspected the same
which having donne they went together to the
kings head tavern in dover to make up their report and certificate
of the said viewing, and three if them namely henry Tiddiman
John Collingwood and Richard Jacobs having dound the said goods
perishable demannded of the said Michael
de hase then present whether hee would subscribe the certificate
that the said goods were perishable, who answered that hee would
neither subscribe perishable nor unperishable, at all which this
deponent was present and sawe and heard the premisses soe
donne and spoken as aforesaid. And for further declaration
of the said perishable condition of the said goods, hee deposeth that
they were speckled and mouldie and the pack cloths rotten with
moisture and wet, and some of the goods were doe damnified
that  this deponent thrust his arme therein up to the elbowe
in at the side thereof without interruption through the
rottenesse thereof.

Adam Woolley [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.484v Annotate
The 30th of January 1653.

The Lord Protector of the Commonwealth)
of England Scotland and Ireland and the)
Dominions thereto belonging against a)
certaine vessell named the House of Egmont)

Examined upon an allegation given in on the
behalfe of his said highnes the Lord
Protector et cetera.

Rowe dt.

John Long of Redriffe in the County of
Surrie Shipwright, aged 30 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

which
hee knoweth having dwelt about 16 yeares in Holland and there using the
said trade of a shipwright all that while, and first learning his said trade
there and saith shee is evident to any skilfull shipwright to be Hollands
built, especially to one that hath lived longe in the countrey to whome this [?XXXX] to knowe
her upon the first viewe to be Hollands built...

[ADD DATA]

John Long [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the said allegation.

dt. 2

Edmund Lemmon of the Borough of Southwarke, one
of the surveyors belonging to the prize office, aged 39
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.485r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The first of ffebruary 1654.

The claime of William Marvin and others)
of fflanders for the Saint Jacob of Dunquirke)
Jacob ffransen master Suckley Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the said Claimers

.jus.

Jacob ffranson of Dunquirke Mariner master
of the said shipp, aged 47 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that the producent
William Marvin of Dunquirke and this deponent of the same have bin for all the time arlate and are
the true and lawfull owners and sole proprietors of the said shipp the
Jacob and of her tackle apparell and furniture and dor such commonly
accompted, which said ship hath for all the said time belonged and doth
belonge to Dunquirke and to noe other place, which hee saith was and is
true and notorious. The premisses hee deposeth being master and a 16th
part-owner of the said shipp
and being acquainted with the
paiemnet or satisfaction given for her. And otherwise hee cannot depose
saving that the said shipp wholly belongeth to the said Marvin saving the said 16th part.

To the second hee saiththat hee this deponent the master of the said shipp
was borne in ffanchurch streete in this citie of London, and was and is by birth
a subiect of England, and saith that having lived many
yeares in Zealand, and finding that by these differences betwixt England and
the United Netherlands, imployment in merchants service grew thereto be
very small or little, and hee this deponent unwilling to engage in the
warrs against his native countrey, went and removed from Zealand to
Dunqwirke there to get imployment in marchants service, and hath ever
since had his dwelling at Dunquirke. and this hee saith was and is also
true and notorious.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.485v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the fifth and sixth articles hee saith and deposeth that soone after
the said buying and this deponents bringing the said shipp to Dunquirke
the said William Meurin sent her (under the conduct of this deponent) to
Berneufe in ffrance, consigned to his correspondents there to lade her
with salt for Dunquirke for the said Maurins accompt, which was
accordingly done in or about August last, and this deponent
retourning with the said shipp and salt arived safely at Dunquirke
and the said William Meurins having sold the said salt upon his owne
accompt to some of Gannt, sent this deponent to deliver it with his
said shipp at Ostend, which this deponent did, and thence it was [?XXXX]
to Gannt, which premisses being soe donne, the said William Meurins
in or about the moneth of October last sent out the said shipp againe
from fflanders for ffrance and consigned her to his correspondent
[?XXXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.486r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

and that accordingly the said
dela val paid this deponents duties of lightmoneys at Dover, and
for convoy gave a letter to Captaine Clarke in service of this Commonwealth then
lying in the Downes and soe dispatched this deponent away with his
said shipp and salt for Dunquirke. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the 9th hee saith that the said Basserode and Coppins are
commonly accompted natives the one of Dunquirke and the other of
Antwerp, and that they were and are partners, and the said Basserode only
laded this deponent, but as being in partnershipp with the said Coppins
who was at Dunquirke when this deponent proceeded last from
fflanders as aforesaid, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the tneth hee saith that the said William Marvin was and is a subiect
of the King of Spaine, and a native as this deponent hath heard
of Saint Omar's or thereabouts in the said Kings dominions, and was
and is a merchant of great dealing into ffrance and back againe
to fflanders for his owne accompt and hath his correspondents in ffrance
to that purpose. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

all his said bills of lading for fflanders were and are true and reall
bills, and this deponent did not signe any other bills of lading
of any other tenor, saving two colourable bills for hamburgh, which were
made to preserve the said goods from the ffrench, but the said goods were
really to have bin delivered in fflanders. And otherwise hee cannot
depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.486v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the third hee saith hee hath knowne the said shipp for theise [?foure]
yeares last or thereabouts, and that shee is hollands built, and saith
hee this deponent having a bill of debt of 1200 gilders upon the [?name]
of one Peter Velinx of fflushing, the said Corneluis Tisen accompted
the same for the payment of the said 700 gilders or therebaouts for this
deponents said 16th part, and paid this deponent the surplus, and
saith there was noe bill of sale but meere delivery of the said shipp
a thinge frequent in these parts, to save the chardge of publique
venditions, wherein there is money payable to the Magistrates, and
otherwise hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions, and saving the
same cannot further depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.487r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

3

Samuel Wright of the parish of Saint Olaves Southwarke
Shipwright aged 22 yeares or therabouts sworne and examined.
To the third article hee saith and deposeth that hee this deponent being
about seaven weekes since imployed with his precontest John ffeadom
to take out the masts of the shipp the Castle Rammekins, and having
gotten leave (for money) of her master of the greate Christopher arlate
to lie aboard him with the Castle Rammekins, and make use of his
mast for pulling out the said mastes of the Castle Rammekins, and
this deponent severall times aboard her, heard the said master and his
steersman and Carpenter railing upon the decks against their Cooke in
the Dutch tongue (which this deponent saith hee understandeth) and say
in a threatening manner that if they had him there they would kill
him for  words that hee had spoken to make their goods prize or to that
effect. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

Upon the rest not examined by direction as aforesaid.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.487v Annotate
The third day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

4

Thomas Rowe of Horsey downe Water man aged 61 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined

To the third article hee saith and deposeth that about tenn weekes since hee
this deponent beig aboard the shipp the Greate Christofer arlate then lying
at Saint Saviours Mill staires (upon which shipp hee this deponent was then
and still is a waiter for Mr Pickering) heard the steersman of the said
shipp raile gainst Cornelius Petersen the Cooke and say that if hee could meete
with him hee would kill him for a roague as hee was, for hee deserved
hanging, and should have bin hanged in his owne countrey but that his
Skipper bought him or in words to that effect and hee further expressed his threates by biting his
naile and using oathes of what hee would doe to the said Cooke, all
this was in broken Dutch and English soe that this deponent (albeit hee
understandeth but a little dutch) could well understand him. And further
that about a moneth  before the premisses, the said Cooke being lodged at [?XX]
Prins at Horsey downe, the said Stiersman and one Christian one of the said
company got him out of the said howse and were by force haling him away
and one kilway out of Captaine Swaines men and this deponent comming by
and seeing the same, they rescued him and put him the said cooke Cornelius
Peterson againe into the said house. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee hath bin a waiter aboard the said shipp for
the said Mr Pykeringe for theise 15 weekes last and is soe still, and
wisheth that right may take place, not withstanding hee be somewhat [?XXXX]
in her taking, having a servant that was one of the takers company, [?whose]
share hee expecteth. And otherwise saving as aforesaid.

To the second hee hath not soe deposed

'TR' [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before doctors Clarke and Godolphin.
----
The 4th of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the fore said allegation.

5.

Nicholas Hutton of the parish of Saint Olave in the Borough
of Southwarkke Waterman aged 48 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that in a day happening in or about the moneth of September 1653
hee this deponent being aboard the shipp the greate Christofer arlate
then lying a little belowe Ratcliffe [?Check] sawe a tall yellowish haired
palefaced man (whom hee hath since heard to be named Mr Lewes)
come aboard, and heard him aske for the stiersman, who commin [?to]
him, hee asked what they had got aboard, and the said stiersman answered
hemp and pot ashes, the said person that soe came aboard, [?said] that
the goods were his, to which this deponent making answer, howe can that [?be]
seeing the shipp was bound for dunquirke, its noe matter said the other
the goods were to come to [?XXX] or to that effect, And otherwise hee cannot depose
Upon the rest not examined by direction of the Producent.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.488v Annotate
The 6 of ffebruary 1653.

[?XXX] and company against the)
Greate Christofer)

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

6.

William Clarke a Souldier of Colonell Ingold[?steins]
Regiment, aged 29 yeares or therabouts sworne and
examined.

To the third article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that on a day
happening about a moneth or five weekes since, hee this deponent was
in company of the arlate Cornelius Peterson at one Mr Budds a victualling
house in Southwarke, and in discourse with the said Cornelius in the dutch
tongue (which this deponent well understandeth having lived 6 yeares
and upwards in Holland) and the said Cornelius being moved then by Mr Pickering to come
over to the Admiraltie Court to be a witnesse and testifie something
further then what hee had formerly spoken, hee the said Cornelius
excused the same, saying hee was and went in feare of his life
being (as hee said) threatened by the shipps company to be killed for what
hee had said before, and therefore durst not come, albeit this
deponent and another souldier undertooke to guard him.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.489r Annotate
The 7th of ffebruary 1653.

Claime of the said Maurin and company)
for the Saint Jacob and goods)

Examined upon the said allegation.

Rp.

2us.

Francis Tyson of London Merchant aged 31 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined

To the first article hee saith that the shipp arlate the Saint Jacob of Dunquirke
was and is commonly reputed to be belonging alone to the port of Dunquirke and
that the producent Mr  Maurin and the master were and are commonly reputed
her only owners. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second hee saith hee verily beleeveth that the arlate Jacob [?Franson]
master of the shipp was borne in this citie for hee saith hee hath seene a
certificate under the hand of Mr Calendrini one of the Ministers of the
dutch Church in London, declaring his being baptized in that Church And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third, fourth fifth, 6th and 7th hee cannot depose saving what
followeth.

To the 8th article hee saith an ddeposeth that the arlate William Maurin in the moneth of december
last past, by his letters of advise from dunquirke dated 24 december newe stile
to this deponent his correspondent here in London, wrote and advised him
this deponent that hee the said Maurin expected from Nantes a shipp of his named
the Jacob of dunquirke (Jacob ffransen master) laden with salt for
his accompt, and with some wines for accompt of others of fflanders,
and ordered this deponent in the said letter to assure in the assurance office
here in London, foure hundred pounds sterling upon the said shipp and salt from Nantes to dunquirke
for his the said Maurins accompt, which this deponent did accordingly on
the 19th of the said moneth old stile, namely 100 li by ffrancis Sayonn
100 li by Gifford Bale, 100 li by Peter Bultele and 100 li by John
Nicholas Assurers, at 9 li per cent: and drew the praemium by bill
of Exchange upon him the said Maurice 13 January last. And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the 9th and 10th hee saith hee hath received letters and orders from
all the persons of fflanders mentioned in the said 10th article to claime the
wines and goods in the said shipp the Saint Jacob for their accompt, which
letters from most of them hee received the 29th of December last and the
rest shortly after, and that the said persons sent this deponent the
originall accompts, bills of lading and letters from Basserode and
Coppins arlate (whose handwritinge this deponent well knoweth)
manifesting the said lading to be for the said claimers accompts, and certifying
howe the moneys weredrawne for payment for the same for their
accompt, and saith hee knoweth the said inclose letters and
accompts to come from the said Basserode and Coppins for that
this deponent correspondeth with them, and thereby is well acquainted
with the handwriting of them and their men. And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the 11th hee cannot depose, saving as aforesaid, and saving his
correspondent at Plimouth advised him that the said shipp was come in thither by
storme, wherewith this deponent forth with acquainted the said Assurers.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee was borne at fflushing in Zealand, but hath
lived here in this citie for the most part of 16 yeares last, and otherwise
negatively saving as aforesaid.

To the second hee saith hee knoweth the said persons William Maurin
Gerrardo [?Rambin], William Manesier, Theodore douchet, Jaques de
Meulenaer, John Boeve the widowe of John Coppins Jasper and John
de Clerck, Peter van Lausterge, Vincent Candelier and Nicholas
Budier as living in fflanders bu literall correspondence only
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.489v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 7th of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

8

Alice Price of the parish of Saint Olaves in the Borough
of Southwarke wife of William Price Victualler, aged 26
yeeres or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the third article of the said allegation shee saith and deposeth that after
the bringing up of the shipp the Great Christofer arlate, the arlate Cornelius
Peterson the Cooke of the same lodged in this deponents house at the signe
of the Halfe Moone at Horsey Downe staires for the space of three weekes
or thereabouts, about the middle of whch time, namely about a moneth
before Christmas last past on a sunday after dinner there came two
Dutchmen, sea men, and in this deponents sight fell upon the said
Cornelius as hee was walking upon the wharfe before this deponents
dore, and expressing much anger in their words and gestires fell to
haling and pulling him to carry him away by force and strucke
soe much and prevailes soe upon him, that if the said Cornelius had not
bin rescued, shee beleeveth they would by violence have carried and made
him away as this deponent understood by their words; And theise two
men that offered this violence, were as this deponent was informed by
the said Cornelius and by another belonging to the said shipp, two of the
said shipps company, and that they were soe furious and violent
against him because hee the said Cornelius had sworne
against the said shipp. And otherwise shee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first shee saith that Mr Pykering is concerned in this business
as shee conceiveth because hee came and spake to her to come and
depose what shee knew in this matter, and that shee wisheth that
right may take place, And othewise shee cannot answer.

To the last shee hath not soe deposed and therefore the same
concerneth her not.

The marke of the said
[MARKE] Alice Price

Repeated before the three Judges in Court.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.490r Annotate
A.2.

The 25th of January 1653.

Riley and company against the Yellowe)
Basket Claus Peterson late master)

Rp.

.1.

Abraham Timeson of Sniderdorp in
North Holland late Stiersman of the said shipp
the Yellowe Basket, aged 26 yeares or thereabouts
sworne as in the acts of Court and examined
upon certaine Interrogatories ministred on the
behalfe of the said Riley and company saith
as followeth.

To the first second and third Interrogatories hee saith hee was aboard and
was Stiersman of the said shipp the Yellow Basket (Claus Peterson
Ourf master) at the time of her seizure by Captaine Welch and
company), which happened on the sixth of December last (newe
stile) Nore-Norewest of Schagen, at which time the said shipp
was in her course from Dantzike for Amsterdam, at which port of
Amsterdam shee was to dischardge her lading of wheatt, rie, and
other goods, which were for the most part laden for accompt of Marchants of Amsterdam
and other Hollanders and were to be delivered unto them there or their agents, and saith that
Abraham de Witt a Hollander laded 53 lasts of the said rie, and one
Mr Admirall alsoe a Hollander laded 13 lasts of wheat and sixteene
lasts of rie, one Mr Backheuse laded 20 lasts of wheate, one
Hance Sager laded 15 lasts of wheate, Peter Cub laded 30 lasts of rie
and other persons laded the rest being in the whole 147 lasts of wheat
and rie together, and that Peter Vlaerk an Amsteldammer laded 10
baggs of wooll, Gerret vander hovenen 4 baggs of wooll, Garret
Ilbrandsson laded 7 great chests conteyning barrells of glasse
bottles, and 30 cases of bottles, and 8 barrells of [?XXXes] and ex [?hXXXes]
Cornelius Clauson of North Holland laded 9 barrells of Dantzike biscuit,
Claude la Reine a Prussian laded 32 Prussia deales, another Dantziker
20 chests of glasses, another merchant of Munniken Dam named
Cornelius Zacharius laded a pack of Dantzike cloth, hance hasen
a Dane laded 62 barrells of small [?nuts], and 4 baggs of wooll, and
a barrell of gloves and stockings, and that hance Jarianson (or
having some such name) a Dantziker laded 150 rolls of
course linnen or stocking, and saith that all the said lading was to
be dischardged at Amsterdam. And saith that the said shipp belongeth
to Amsterdam, and that her owners dwell there and in other places of
Holland thereabouts, and were and are subiects of the States of the
United Netherlands, and saith that the said master and company live
all in and about Amsterdam and were and are alsoe all subiects
of the said States, and that the shipp was built at Edam, and
that Captaine Welch showd his Commission at the time of
the said seizure.

abram tymensen schort [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.490v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 26th of January 1653.

The claime of Daniel Slegall of)
Stockholme for the Peter Matthias)
Cornelison master. Suckley. Budd.)

'Mathias Cornelison' of Amsterdam Mariner, master
of the said shipp the Peter aged 46 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said alleagtion hee saith and deposeth that
in the yeares 1644 or 1645 and in the summer time, during the warre
betwixt the Dane and Sweden, the shipp the Saint Peter arlate was [?seized]
by the Swann and Calmermarkle two of the shipps in the immediate service
of the Queene of Sweden in the sound from the Kinge of Denmarke
in whose immediate service shee was to the time of the said seizure
which hee knoweth to be true because hee this deponent was then [?there]
in the service of the said Queene aboard her Admirall whereof
this deponent was Captaine. And saith that the producent Daniel Slegall
was and is one of the Nobilitie of Sweden, and was then alsoe in the
said Quens service, in persuance of the said expedition against the [?Dane]
of this deponents sight and knowledge, and after the said seizure
namely the next winter following the said seizure the said Daniell
Slegall of this deponents sight and knowledge bought the said shipp
the Peter of and from the said Queens officers at Stockeholme
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.491r Annotate
for and in consideration of the summe of tenn thousand Rix dollers, paid
or satisfied by the said Slegall to the treasurie of the said Queene upon
discount of soe much due and owing to him from her for his said service
and much money by him disbursed towards victualling the camp, and
for clothing and furnishing of souldiers as they came downe into
the said service out of Sweden Germany and other parts, which premisses
touching his said buying the said shipp this deponent well knoweth
being present and privie to the same, and presently constituted master
of the said vessell by the said Slegall, and ever since this deponent
hath bin master thereof, and thereby well knoweth that the said
Daniel Slegall hath ever since bin and at this present is the true
lawfull, and sole owner of the said shipp Peter and of her tackle
and furniture, and for such commonly accompted and reputed, And this
hee saith was and is true and notorious.

To the second article hee saith and deposeth that the said Daniel
Slegall was and is a Senator of Stettin, subiect of the said Queene
and her servant and a Nobleman as aforesaid of Sweden, and soe
much this deponent declared at Plimouth upon his examination there
to such as tooke his examination, but whether they have there
set downe truely and rightly what this deponent said and declared hee
knoweth not, for hee saith that hee that undertooke to interprete this
deponent (who saith hee cannot speake English) spake dutch very
broken and imperfectly, soe that this deponent could but here and there
understand either what hee said or read over to this deponent; And
saith that this deponent then declared (and that accordinge to the truth)
that hee had well knowne the said Daniell Slegall for theise eight
yeeres last or thereabouts, and hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing
deposition and cannot otherwise depose.

To the third and 4 hee saith that hee this deponent hath made severall
voyages with the said shipp betwixt Stockholme and Amsterdam, and
from time to time hath had order from his said owner Daniel Slegall
that what moneyes this deponent should  have remayning (after defrayinge
of chardges) of his freights to Amstedam, hee should from time to time
pay or deliver the same into the hand of the arlate Jaques [?Loona] of
Amsterdam, to be by him remitted to the said Daniel by exchange, and
alsoe that in case  this deponent had occasion for more moneys than hee
had in had for the said shipps occasions hee should take it up of the
said Loon upon the said Slegalls  accompt, all which this deponent hath
donne accordingly: and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fifth hee saith that for two yeares together or thereabouts
about the time of this deponents said first comming into the said shipp hee
this deponent lived in Stockholme with his wife, children and familie,
And otherwise saving as aforesaid hee cannot depose.

To the 6th hee saith that whatever razure is or appeareth in his
ffrench passe, the same was donne at Tholon where the said
passe was made by such as had the making thereof or filling of it up in
at the Customhouse there, And otherwise hee cannot depose
saving that this deponent was at Plimouth at he time of his examination after
told by some present
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.491v Annotate
Rowe dt

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee was at Amsterdam with the said shipp about
18. or 19 monethes since, and not since, and that hee alone hath bin
alwaies master of the said shipp since the said Slegall his said buying
thereof as aforesaid, And otherwise hee cannot answer saving his
foresaid deposition.

To the second hee saith that the service and imployment of the said
Slegall in the said warres under the Queene of Sweden was in the way of
a Commission or some such office to receive the souldiers at Stettin
and furnish them with provisions of meate drinke, clothes and other
accomodations, and then to send them to the the armie; and saith that
hee did not see any bill of sale or other transport in writing made of
the said shipp to the said Slegall, but beleeveth it was entred in the
Queens officers bookes as is donne in like cases for others. And further
hee cannot answer saving as aforesaid.

To the third hee saith the said shipp came about two yeares and  a halfe
since from Stockholme to Amsterdam laden with iron and copper and
delivered the same to severall Merchants of Amsterdam; and that about
19 monethes since hee came from Amsterdam with peece goods laden
by severall merchants bound for Cadiz in Spaine, where hee had delivered
the same to severall merchants or factors, and thence went in ballast to
Allicant and there got a freight of barilla and cable twine or [?Sparto] for
Marseilla, and thence backe againe to Allicant, and made severall [?XX]
and freights in Spaine and back againe to Marseilla and thence to
Tolon where hee tooke in the said shipps present lading of currants
for hamburgers, or if prevented by the Ice or time of the yeere then
for Ostend or Dunquirke, and for the accompt and to whom the said
goods are belonging hee referreth himselfe to the bills of lading and
documents seized in the said shipp, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the fourth hee saith that hee hath heard that the said shipp is Hollands
built, but doth not know that shee is soe. And saith shee was 
victualled at Amsterdam and manned there upon her proceeding thence
as aforesaid. And otherwise referreth himselfe to his foregoing depositions.

To the fifth hee saith hee this deponent was borne at a dorp or village in [?BXX]
in the dominion of the Kinge of Spaine about 3 miles from Berghen
op't Zoom, but came very yonge thence and was educated at Skadam
in Holland, and hath lived the most of his time in Holland and Zeeland
in the dominion of the States of the United Netherlands, and when he
proceeded last (as aforesaid) from Amsterdam, hee left his wife and
familie there, and that there are not above three or foure Hollanders in
his company, the rest being of other out countries, not subiects of the
said States. And otherwise hee cannot answer saving as aforesaid

To the 6th negatively to every part thereof saving his foregoing depositions to
which hee referreth himselfe, saying the said shipp never belonged to
Amsterdam since this deponents knowledge of her.

To the 7th hee saith that at Marseilla this last voyage, hee
remitted by the hands of Tobias Solicoffer to the said Jaques Loone
to Amsterdam 2000 gilders, to be by the said Loon remitted to the said
Slegall, by meanes that there was noe commoditie of exchange
from Marseilla for Stettin or Stockholme, and saith the said [??money]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.492r Annotate
Was freight of the said shipps earning. and saith there was a
redd flagg with the figure of a hand and 

[ADD DATA]
----
The 26th of January 1653.

Bellamy et Cooper against Clarke.)

Examined upon alleagtion in the acts of Court
on the behalfe of the said Bellamy
and Coooper.

1

Thomas Lockington of the parish of Saint Mary
Magdalen old fish street London ffishmonger
aged 53 yeares or thereabouts, sworne and examined.

To the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that the rate and
price of a barrell of redd herrings in London in the monethes of
October, November and December in the yeere 1646 was ordinarily
and as the common selling price one barrell with another
25 s per barrell and white herrings 30 s per barrell, which hee
knoweth being a fishmonger and selling many barrells of herrings of each of the
said sorte in that time and buying many, as bu his bookes which hee
hath laetely perused appeareth and is to be seene.

Thomas Lockington [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the said allegation.

2

Henry Burrowes servant of Widdowe Branckstome of
the parish of Saint Mary Magdalen old ffish streete
London ffishmonger aged 24 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the said allegation hee saith that in October, November and December
1646 the ordinary market and selling price of redd herrings was 25 s
per barrell and of white herrings 30 s per barrell, which hee knoweth
being a fishmonger and then exercising that trade, and having perused his
masters booke for the price of the commodities in
those monethes.

Henry Burrowes./] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated as aforesaid.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.492v Annotate
The fourth of ffebruary 1653.

The claime of John Scothering and)
Paul Logerman for their goods in the Peter)
Matthias Cornelison master.)
Suckley. Budd.)

Examined upon the allegation on the
behalfe of the said Claimers.

.1.

Jacob Gevers of Hamborough Mariner aged [?XX]
yeeres or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee well
knoweth the producent John Scothering and hath soe donne for all the time [?XXXXX]
[?XXX], during which space the said John Scothering hath lived and bin an
Inhabitant of Hamborough wherein hee th said John was borne and was and
is a subiect of that free state, and a marchant, and for theise eighteene
or nineteene yeares last hath bin and is one of the Senators and Magistrates
of that citie, and that hee was and is a greate dealer and trader and
a merchant for ffrance Spaine, Italy, and into the Levant and most of the
considerable places of trade in Europe and Asia, and to that purpose he had
and hath many factors and correspondents in those parts unto whom hee
useth to send, and to receive from them many and greate parcells and quantities
of merchandizes, and for such a person as aforesaid, and a merchant
of soe greate dealing hee the said John Scothering was and is Commonly
accompted and reputed; All which hee knoweth being borne and having for
all his time dwelt in Hamborough, where hee hath had speciall knowledge
of the said Scothering, being a person of such eminence and dealings
for that hee this deponent hath out and homewards in severall yeares
and voyages carried many parcells of goods for him (in severall shipps
whereof this deponent hath bin commannder and whereof hee the said Scothering
hath bin part owner) for Spaine and into the streights and home
againe, and having nowe goods for him brought from Venice in the
Wheele of ffortune by this deponents present shipp, and knowing of the
goods that hee hath lately had in Peter Van dame, Thomas Utey[?XXX]
Martin holst and other hamburger shipps from the streights from
Marseilla, Ligorne, and Venice. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second and sixth articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that there hath bin for many yeares last and is a very eminent and
considerable familie of merchants of greate accompt and dealing called
and knowne by the name of the Solicoffers, being a familie of
a dozen persons, brokers, cozen germans and Nephews of that name and
have setled houses of factorie and merchandizes at Marseilla, Allicant
Genoa, Lyons, and Wienen in Austria and other places, and that one
of them named Tobias Solicoffer was
and is Consul for the Hamburgers and other hansa townes at Marseilla,
and saith they were and are Switzers by birth [?XX]
and descending from Saint FGalo in Switzerland where ther principall
residence is, and saith they are accustomed to proceede and come by two
or three at a time from their said residence at Saint Galo's to Marseilla
and Lyons, and to stay there three or four monethes and then returne or goe to other of their factories and
other of the familie to come in their places, and after that manner or for
longer or shorter time they use to supplie their other factories, All which hee
knoweth having bin a whole yeare with them at Marseila, and having
carried goods to them from Hamborough, and back againe, and particularly
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.493r Annotate
some for the accompt of the said John Scothering, with whom the said
Solicoffers of this deponents knowledge doe correspond in traffique, and
have much money of his (the proceed of goods) in their hands, and
for such persons as aforesayd, and for merchant strangers of Marseilla
and originaries of Saint Gallo in Switzerland (the place of their constant dwelling)
they the said Solicoffers whom this deponent hath knowne for theise fifteene
yeares last were and are commonly accompted and reputed, And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the rest hee is not examined by direction of the producent.

To the Interrogatories ministred in the claime of Slegall
for the shipp.

To the first, 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9 hee saith hee cannot answer saving as aforesaid
for hee neither knoweth the said shipp nor master nor ought concerning her lading
on the voyage in question.

To the last hee saith that in the time of the late warrs betwixt Spaine and
Holland it was usuall in Spaine for such Hamburger skippers as were
there and heard Hollanders (demannded by the Spaniards whence their shipps
were) answer of Hamborough, to say to them privatley, yes
of great Hamborough, meaning Amsterdam. And otherwise hee cannot
answer.

Jacob [?gXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before thr three Judges in Court.
----
The 7th of ffebruary 1653.

Riley and company against the)
Oastwould)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the said Riley and company

.1us.

Abraham Tymeson Schout of Zinderdorpe in North Holland
Mariner aged 26 yeares or thereabouts, sworne
and examined.

To the second and third articles hee saith and deposeth that on or about
the 6th of December last Newstile the arlate Captaine Welch on the
high and open sea Nore-Norewest of Schagen on the coast of Jutland
met with set up on and seized the said shipp the Oastwoald (whereof
Govert Marsh was master) laden with wheat and rie comming from
Dantzike bound for Amsterdam, there to dischardge; and saith that the saud
Govert Marsh the master and all his company seeing the said Captaine
Welch approach forsooke and deserted their shipp and betooke themselves
to their boate and therewith fledd ashore at Schagen,
The premisses hee knoweth because hee this deponent came from Dantzike
in her company in the shipp the Yellow Basket of Municken Dam
whereof this deponent was Stiersman, and because the said shipp the Yellow
Baskett was at the same time seized by the said galley neare the Oastwoald
and this deponent seeing the said master and company soe desert the said
shipp and runn ashore, to avoide takeing, and saith the said Welch
could not prevent their running ashore. And saith the said shipp the
Oastwoald ws and is Hollands built, and belonging to Brook in
Waterland in
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.493v Annotate
Waterland in North Holland, and that her owners were and are all Hollanders
living in North Holland, subiects of the States of the United Netherlands
namely derrick Garretson and John Garretson of Brooke aforesaid, and
the [?preacher] of the same towne and others, and soe much this deponent
before their being met by Captaine Welby heard the said Garret [?marssX]
her master and others of her company say; And otherwise hee cannot depose

[?Abram] [?XXXX] [?tymenXXX]XX [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 7th of ffebruary 1653.

The Lord Protector against a shipp)
called now the two Brothers, and formerly)
(as is said) the ffortune. Budd.)

.jus.

Rowe dt.

William Cornelison of Dunkirke Mariner
Master of the said shipp the two Brothers
aged 43 yeares or thereabouts, sworne
and examined.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee hath well knowne the shipp
the Two Brothers for theise three or foure monethes last past, and that
shee was about foure monethes since bought at Rotterdam of some
of that towne; and that at the time of the sale of her and until the
sale was made shee was belonging to that port of Rotterdam, which
hee knoweth because hee this deponent was at Rotterdam and present at the
said buying her by Mr Baldero an Englishman there dwelling, And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the second hee saith hee this deponent is an English man borne at [?ffarXXly]
neere Liverpoole in Lancashire, where hee lived till hee was about [?ten]
yeares of age, and thence went and lived 5 yeares in Spaine, thence hee
went into the streights and [?setled] up and downe there about
six yeares and then in other places, and hath used that imployment as a
sailor from port to port till hee came to settle in fflanders, where 
at Ostend and Dunquirke hee hath lived and kept house for these 11
yeares last. And saith his name in English is William Keeles, and that
he was alwayes called by that name in England, but not abroad, the
Spaniards calling him William Cornelia and the fflemings Willemm Cornelison
as nearest to his owne name and to their pronunciation, and that this deponents
fathers name was Robert Keeles, and that his said father was alwayes
called by that name, And otherwise cannot depose saving what followeth.

To the third hee saith that his wife lived alwayes with him at Ostend [?and]
Dunquirke for the time aforesaid of his dwelling there till about five
monethes since that shee dyed, saving that for a yeeres speace or thereabouts
ended about a twelvemoneth since, shee and this deponent dwellt
at Amsterdam, and that his nowe dwelling is in Dunquirke, where
(living single) hee hath only a chamber.

To the fourth hee saith that hee brought in the said shipp to this port [?some]
Queene stones and hops, which were laden aboard her at Rotterdam by Mr
Baldero aforesaid, and consigned to Dunquirke to be delivered to Joos [?XXX]
of Dunquirke for whose accompt they were laden, and after entrie
thereof at Dunquirke by the said ffreemont (to whom this deponent [?XX]
of the said shipp delivered them) hee the said ffreemeont sent them for this
port, consigned to Mr Baldeo here dwelling, and to Mr
Cotten a merchant here, and this deponent  delivered
the same accordingly to the said Mr Baldero, and sawe other goods namely [?XXX]
[?tXXX] to another English merchant here whom this deponent knoweth not
by name, and that Mr Baldero here dwelling is to pay the freight for all, but he [?hath]
not yet paid the same, and that they were here delivered for the sayd ffreemont
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.494r Annotate
To the first hee saith hee hath bin master of the said shipp ever since shee
was bought as aforesaid, and was constituted master by the said ffreemont
to whom shee belongeth, and for whose accompt shee was bought
by Mr Baldeo, which Mr ffreement sent this deponent from dunquirke
to holland to fetch her and goe master of her from Rotterdam, where
hee tooke possession of her, And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving
his foregoeing deposition.

To the 6th hee saith hee hath knowne the said ffreemot for theise
15 or 16 yeares or thereabouts, and sawe him last at dunquirke about
a moneth since at which time this deponent came thence, and never sawe
him in Rotterdam or any other place in the dominion of the States of the
United Netherlands

[ADD DATA]
----
The 10th of ffebruary 1653.

[?Chilston] and company against the Greate)
Christofer. Smith. Suckley.)

Examined upon tHE first allegation.

8:113:

Michael ffeerkee of Stetin in Pomerland
Mariner one of the companie of the said shipp
the Greate Christofer aged 36 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.495r Annotate
Capers, who as hee beleeveth, have induced the said Corneluis by
rewards and promises to sweare what hee hath sworne on this behalfe, And
otherwise hee cannot answer

To the fiffth hee saith the owners of the said shipp and goods have suffered
much losse and dammage in the longe lying of the same under the said
seizure, in victualls and wages and losse of market and otherwise
hee cannot depose.

Repeated before Doctors Clarke and Godolphin

'X' [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The 13th of ffebruary 1653.

The claime of the said Maurin and)
others for the Saint Jacob and goods.)

Examined upon the foresaid alleagtion.

3.

Thomas de la Val of Dover Merchant aged
32 yeares or therabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith that before the seizure in
question of the shipp the Saint Jacob, the arlate William Maurin noth
wrote and afterwards told unto this deponent that the said shipp was his, and that
noe Hollander or ffrenchman s ubiect of the States of Holland or ffrench king
had any interest therein, and saith shee is reputed to be belonging to
the port of Dunquirke. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second hee saith hee well knoweth the arlate Jacon ffranson master
of the said shipp, and saith hee is commonly reputed an Englishman, borne in
London. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the seaventh and 8th article hee saith and deposeth that the said William Maurin
by his letter bearing date in July lastand by other letters sent shortly
after to this deponent, wrote unto and advised this deponent that hee expected
the said shipp from Nantes laden with salt and wines for Dunquirke for the accompt of him the 
said Maurin and of other merchants of fflanders and desired this deponent to give the said master
(touching therewith at Dover) assistance and supplie for Convoy and otherwise
for Dunquirke, which this deponent assisted him accordingly in, paying his light
money and other chardges for the said master and shipp and dispatched her
away for Dunquirke, and drew the money upon the said Maurin who hath
paid him, And upon a later voyage in or about the moneth of October
last the said meurin wrote alsoe to this deponent to dover to assist the
said master both outwards and homewards touching at dover, the said
voyage being for Nantes for salt and wines to be thence transported to dunquike
for the said [?Mauerius] and freinds accompt as hee wrote unto this deponent,
And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the 9th hee saith hee well knoweth the arlate Basserode and Coppins
and saith they are commonly accoptd fflandrians by birth, and the
said Coppins lived severall yeares in Dover and was there
constantly reputed a fflandrian borne, and about two monethes since this
deponent being at Dunquirke, heard that the said Coppins lay sick there
And saith the said Vadderode and Coppins are in Company as partners in
factorie, and (as is usuall) hee of either of them that
writes letters to their correspondents from Nantes write both their names
though the other be not present this hee knoweth corresponding with
them. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the tenth hee saith the said Maurin is a fflandrian borne (as this deponent
hath heard) at Saint Omer, and liveth in Duimquirke and is a subiect of the
Kinge of Spaine, and this deponent hath had correspondence with [?ThXXXX]
[?longest]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.495v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith that hee this rendent is an Englishman, borne at
Higate and hath lived at Dover for theise 11 yeares last, and otherwise
negatively.

To the second hee saith hee hath knowne the said William Maurin for theise [?XXX]
yeares last, and otherwise hee refrreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition saving
that the said Maurin hath dwelt and kept his familie at Dunquirke
severrall yeares last

To the third 4 and 5th hee saith hee hath knowne the said shipp the James about 7 monethes
last, but this deponent was not present nor knoweth ought
of her buying, but is convinced in his conscience that shee really belongeth
to the said maurin, and that noe Hollander or ffrenchman or subiect of the
kinge of ffrance or of the States of the United Netherlands have or hath
any interest therein, for hee saith the said Maurin having speech with this
deponent (being lately at Dunquirke) about the said shipp and her sending
for ffrance and this deponent giving the maser assistance at Dover, this
deponent  earnestly urged and conjured him the said Maurin that if hee
were any wayes unfree in respect of England hee should not use this deponents
assistance or to that effect, whereupon the said Maurin seriously averred and
protested with an oath that shee was his and his freiends and that noe subiect of the States aforesaid
or kinge of ffrance had any interest therein.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 17th of ffebruary 1653.

Keeling and company against the)
Beehive, John Saunderson master.)

John Saunderson of Berghen in Norway
Mariner, master of the said shipp the
Beehive, aged 33 yeares or thereabouts
sworne as in the Acts of Court and examined
upon certaine Interrogatories ministredon the
behalfe of the said Keeling and company
saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

belonge to the port of Berghen in Norway where this deponent 
and all the owners of the said shipp dwell, and that the said owners
[?were]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.496r Annotate
were and are by name Hendrick Neme who is owner of a 16th part
of the said vessell, tackle and furniture, Hendrick Magers  a 16th part
John Buissell, John Sluyter, Hendrick Wessell, Peter Northwisen
Gertrude Weekfef, John Naghel, Eusten Ostrick, Hance
Graffle, Olaf Peirson, Harman Staet, Evers Sluyters, Holwick
Wellinge, Olo Losse and hee this deponent every one a sixteenth
part, and saith they were and are all citizens and
Burghers of Berghen in Norway, and subiects of the King of
Denmarke; and saith the said shipp as hee hath heard was built at
Edam in Holland by Claes Brewn of Neuwerdam and his then owners, but
who those owners were hee knoweth not, And saith that
of the said owners were the originall buyers by their factors about three yeares
since of the said shipp at Amsterdam at an outcrie or publique
vendition thereof, and that the rest of the owners have since bought their
parts from them. And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving this deponent
was alsoe one of the first buyers.

To the second hee saith hee was borne and hath dwelt all his time in
Berghen aforesaid, where hee hath bin maried 11 yeares and kept his wife
and familie there, and saith his shipps company are all
Norwegians, and came first aboard the said shipp at Berghen,
where hee hired them to goe with the said ship this voyage to Amsterdam, and
thence to retourne to Berghen aforesaid, and this deponent was to
pay them. And otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition hee cannot depose.

To the third hee saith the said shipps lading at the time of her seizure
consisted in Stoockfish, hasell Nutts namely about 3 or 400 barralls
of nutts, about 300 dirkus of goate skines, about 3 or foure lasts of
tallowe about 10 or 12 barralls of beefe, and about halfe a
last of traine oile and some drie ox hides all which were laden at Berghen and to be
transported to Amsterdam there to be delivered to Matthias Weinckle
Anthony Hendrickson, Elerd Weerd, Hendrick Arbrooke, John Loons,
Laurence Barentson, Peter Peterson and Jarvis Tonover merchants and
factors dwelling in Amsterdam; and that the foresaid Hendrick Magers
aforesaid and other Burghers of Berghen laded the said goods, saving one
John Berkelen a Lubeccker a passenger laded nutts, fish, and skinns
and tallowe for his owne accompt, and a young man amed Hance Ma[?ghel]
of Bergen alsoe a passenger laded fish and tallowe for his accompt, and
this deponent laded and hath aboard for his oweaccompt 110 dickers of
fells. and 6 barrells of tallowe , and 600 [?waghe] of fish, each
[?waghe] contayning 36 pounds, and the rest of the said lading belongeth
to them of Amsterdam

To the fourth hee saith hee wsa freighted by the parcell after 7 stivers
per [?waghe], and 28 stivers the barrell, and 14 stivers the dicker
for goate skinns, and was to be paid (for such goods as were
not laden y owners of the shipp) at Amsterdam, and saith there are
noe bills of lading made or signed for the said goods.

To the 5th hee saith hee was taken  at sea before the fflie, steering
for Amsterdam, and that one tresor was Captaine of the shipp that
tooke him; and saith there were some Hollanders that came from the
East India's and were passengers in the said shipp from Berghen for Amsterdam
who
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.496v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 20th of ffebruary 1653.

2

Laers Woolson of Berghen in Norway one of the
company of the said shipp the Beehive, aged 20 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined, saith as followeth

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.497r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 20th of ffebruary 1653.

The claime of Anthony Headibaut and)
Jaques Coquille of Lile in fflanders)
for their goods in the Charitie. Simon Sas)
master)

Examined upon the allegation
and schedules on the behalfe
of the said claimers

Rp.

.1.

John Francois of Lisle in fflanders Marchant
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.498r Annotate
The 21th of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The claime of the duke of Courland)
for the Temperance of Libaun in Curland)
John Jacobson Bleau master, and of the said duke)
and Luke Lucie for the goodds.)

Examined upon an allegation on
the behalfe of the said claimers.

Rp.

.j.

Abraham Gaultier of the citie of London Merchant
aged 33 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article hee cannot depose, saving hee this deponent hath
seene letters from Peter Batten merchant of Libaun signifying that the
said shipp belongeth to the said duke.

To the second, third and fourth articles hee saith and deposeth that  in or about
the moneth of August last past the arlate Peter Batten factor to the
said Luke Lucie being here in London and at the house of the said Mr
Lucie situat in ffenchurchstreete London, and being upon his
retourne for Libaun in Courland (whence hee came lately before) the said
Luke Lucie in this deponents presence and hearing spake unto him and
gave him order that forthwith after his retourne and arivall at Libaun
hee should lade a shipp with linseede and flax and send the same
away thence for Roscow in ffrance, whereunto the said Batten agreed
and they both accorded that the sad lading should be three quarter parts
for the accompt of him the said Lucie, and the fourth or other
quarter part for the accompt of him the said Peter Batten, and
that the same should by the said Batten be consigned to Peter dela Port
at Roscow aforesaid in Bretany in the kingdome of ffrance for the said
accompt of the said Mr Lucy and Peter Batten, All which order and
discourse this deponent came to be present and to take notice thereof
being Cashier of the said Mr Lucy and living in his house; and
very shortly after the said order soe given and repeated over againe the said
Peter Batten departed hence upon his said retourne and saith that
by letters received from the said Peter Batten from Libaun dated there
in or about October and November last and directed and sent to the
said Lucas Lucy, and in particular by a letter dated from Libau
the 26th of November last and sent from the said Batten to the
said Mr Lucie, hee the said Batten advised first that hee
would and afterwards that hee had shipped aboard the shipp Temperance
of Lubeck (John Jacobsen Blau master) which shipp (as hee wrote) hee had freighted
about 1500 barrells and baggs of linseede, and a parcell of flax
to be transported to Roscow for the accompt of the said Mr Lucie
and himselfe ot to that effect, and that hee afterwards sent the accompt thereof dated
the third of January which came to the hands of the said Mr Lucie about
three weekes since, which this deponent knoweth for the reasons aforesaid
and having seene and perused the said letters and accompt, and this
deponent leaveth the said letter of the date of 26th of November for
the indormation of this Court, and having nowe seene the accompt
exhibited in this allegation, hee saith the same is the true accompt
predeposed, soe received by the said Mr Lucie from the said Mr batten
And saith the said Mr Lucie hath paid and satisfied the said Mr Batten
for the said Lucies three quarter parts of the said lading partly
by moneys of his (the proceede of English manufactures sold att dunkirke
by hance van [?Bowningham] and Elias [?Rurke] the said Lucies factors
there and after the said van B[?XXXXX] hath remitted and satisfied the [XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] to the said Batten by the
said Mr Lucies order, and the rest with moneys remayneing in the hands
of
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.498v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
~~~
the said Batten was and is the factor and correspondent of the said Luke Lucie
and hath every yeere for 4 or 5 yeeres last laded linseede and other goods
at Libaun for ffrance and London for the said Mr Lucies accompt, and
this deponent hath heard him the said Batten say, and it is generally
said and reputed that the said Batten hath lived for 18 yeares in the
East countrey, and that hee dwelleth and keepeth his wife and family
at Libaun, and was and is a subiect of the said duke of Curland
and saving hee saith that in reagard of the differences betwixt the English
and dutch the said Mr Lucie hath ordered the said Batten to make the
bills of lading, Charter partie and freight letters in his the said
Battens owne name.

To the fiftharticle hee saith and deposeth that the arlate Peter
dela Port to whom the said goods are consigned at Roscow was 
and is the factor of the said Mr Lucy and soe hath bin for severall
yeares last and was and is to sell the same for the accompt of the
said Mr Lucie and others interessed therein, which hee knoweth
for the reasons aforesaid. And otherwise hee cannot depose

To the sixth hee saith that the said Peter Batten in one of his letters
alsoe advised the said Mr Lucie that the said Duke had caused
a parcell of pipestaves of about 5000 to be laden under
the said goods for the said Dukes Adventure, and the retourne
to be made to him in wines. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee is a native of Augou lesmer
in ffrance and hath for 10 years last lived in London and 4
yeares or thereabouts before in Ireland, and otherwise saving his foregoeing deposition
hee answereth negatively.

[ADD DATA]

To the 6th hee saith thee hath knowne the said Peter Batten about
5 or 6 yeares by correspondence with Mr Lucie and about 6 monethes
personally, and Peter de la Port personally about 12 yeares 
and saith the said dela Port is a ffenchman and lives at [?XXXX]
and formerly in Ireland, and otherwise hee cannot deposesaving as
aforesaid.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.499r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 22th of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

2

Cornelius van Bommell of London merchant, aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.499v Annotate
which Batten hee saith was and is the said Mr Lucies factor and correspondent
and hath for severall yeares last laden severall shipps from
Libaun with linseede and other goods going for Roscowe and some for
London for the said Mr Lucies his accompt, and as this deponent hath heard
him say and as is commonly reported the said Batten is a Burger of
Libaun and a subiect of the duke of Curland, and hath lived there and
elswhere in the East countrey 17 or 18 yeares, and hath a wife and family
at Libaun, and saith that in regard of the warres with holland, the said
Mr Lucie hath given him order to make the bills of ladeing and shipps a
dispatches in his the said Battens owne name, And otherwise hee cannot
depose.

To the 5th hee saith that the said Mr Lucie after the said order given
for the said lading consented and was pleased that his brother Jacob LUcie
should come in for a twelfth part of the said goods with him and this
deponent (who hath served him above 11 yeares) alsoe for a 12th
part, and Mr John Cole an English merchant (nowe in the west countrey)
for a quarter part, (but none of them have yet paid him ought for their parts)
and that the same was at Rosco to be sold for the said accompts by
the said delaport, who was and is the said Mr Lucies factor and
hath soe bin for severall yeares last.

To the 6th hee saith that the said Batten alsoe advised by letters that
the said duke had caused a parcell of pipestaves to be laden aboard
the said shipp for his owne accompt, to have retourne in wines
and that the said pipestaves hee wrote were for Dunnidge, that is to say
that they were under the other goods to keepe them from dammage 
by water. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first hee saith hee is a native of Salt bommell in Gelderland
and otherwise negatively saving as aforesaid.

To the 2. 3. and 4 hee cannot depose.

To the 5th hee referreth himselfe to his deposition aforegoing.

To the 6th hee hath knowne Peter Batten by correspondence with Mr
Lucie about 6 yeares and Peter dela Port this deponent hath
knowne ppersonally for about 13 yeares, and the said Peter as hee beleeveth
is a ffrench man, and liveth nowe at Morlaix, and otherwise
saving as aforesaid hee cannot depose.

To the 7th hee cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the 8th negatively.

To the 9th hee saith the said Batten trades alsoe for himselfe
and soe as hee beleeveth doth the said Peter dela Port. And otherwise
negatively, saving that about 5 yeeres since the said Mr Lucie sold
a parcell of goods for the said Batten.

To the 10th hee saith the said Mr Lucie hath remitted moneys at severall
times by other his correspondents to the said Batten An otherwise
hee cannot depose, saving as aforesaid.

To the 11th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and is [?assured]
that the said three quarter parts are paid and satisfied with the
proper moneys of the said Mr Lucie.

To the 12 negatively.

To the last hee referreth himselfe to his foregoinge deposition.

Cornelius Van Bommell [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.500r Annotate
The 23th of ffebruary 1653.

The claime of Lewes [?Grulois] of Lisle)
for goods in the [?sedame]. Suckley Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on
the behalfe of the said [?Grulois]

1

John François of Lisle in fflanders Marchant
aged 30 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee well
knoweth the producent Lewis Grulois and hath soe donne for theise tenn
or twelve yeares last past, during which time hee hath dwellt in Lile
in fflanders (where this deponent was borne and hath dwellt all his time)
and hath bin and is a subiect of the kinge of Spaine, and was borne as
this deponent hath heard at Oudenard in fflanders in the said kings
dominion, and saith the arlate John van Poulle was and is commonly
reputed alsoe a ffleming, and a merchant stranger in ffrance, and
the factor and coorespondent of the said Grulois there, which said Mr
Grulois hee saith driveth a good trade to and from ffrance for wines
amnd other goods, which hee this deponent knoweth living in the same howse
as aforesaid with him, and thereby taking notice of the premisses they
being both merchants. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the second and third articles of the said allegation and to the schedule
annexed mentioned in the said third article hee saith and deposeth that
in or about the beginning of the moneth of december last, the said
Grulois meeting this deponent on the Exchange in Lisle and
discoursing with him, and knowing that this deponent was alsoe a
dealer into ffrance, asked him this deponent, if he had not
or expected goods from Bordeaux
in the shipp the Usedome, Pasque Alberts Master, bound from
Bourdeaux for dunquirke, and this deponent answering noe, the
said Grulois told him this deponent that hee expected tenn tonnes
of wine therein, which hee had caused to be bought with moneys
(as hee said) which hee caused to be remitted from Saint Sebastians
by his factor there, named Wouter Adams, and being soe concerned
hee was very inquisitive both then and afterwards of this deponent and other merchants
that traded for ffrance if they had any newes of the said shipp, for
as then hee saith there was noe newes come of her seizure, and
withall showed this deponent letters from the said van Poulle
touching the lading the said tenn tonnes of wine for the said Grulois
his accompt, And saith the marke in the margin of the said
allegation was and is the ordinary marke of the said Lewis Grulois
And to the said schedule or accompt annexed hee saith hee this
deponent is well acquainted with the firme of the said van Poulle
having often seene the same, and is thereby well assured that the said accompt
was and is subscribed with the said van Poulles owne hand, And
otherwise hee cannot depose, saving hee hath alsoe seene by the said
van Poulles letters to the said Grulois that hee had received the
moneys
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.500v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 24th of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The claime of Jaques Coquille and)
Julian d'Estre of Lile in fflanders for)
25 peeces of Brandewine, seized in the)
Saint John of Lubeck, Paul Alberts master.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the said claimers.

.j.

Ive d'Estre of Lile in fflanders merchant
aged 21 yeares or thereabouts, sworne and
examined.

To the first second and third articles of the said allegation hee saith and
deposeth that hee well  knoweth the producents Jaques Coquille and
Julian d'Estre of Lile in fflanders, and saith they are greate traders
to ffrance for brandewines, wines, and other commodities, and that about
8 or 9 monethes since they gave order by letters to their factor and correspondent
at Bourdeaux John van Poulla to provide and buy for their accompt
150 peeces of brandewine, and lade the same and consigne
them to Guillaume [?Meuria] their factor at dunquirke or Adrian van
Torr at Ostend, or Lewes [?Lambrecht] at Neiuport for their the said
producents accompt, which hee knoweth being soone and servant to the
said Julian d'Estre, and imployed in his counting house andcopying the
said letters

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.501r Annotate
to William Maurin at Dunquirke and sent the accompt or
Invoice of the said goods with the chardges thereupon, and that the schedules
annexed were and are the said originall letter and accompt, and were received
from the said van Poulle by the said producents at Lile by the ordinary
post this deponent being present and acquainted with the receipt thereof
and with the sending them
over hether, and seeing them at Lile before the said sending. And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the fourth hee saith that soone after the said letter received as aforesaid the
said producents wrote and gave order to Mr ffrancis [?Tison] their correspondent
here in London to make assurance upon the said 25 peeces of brandewine
laden aboard the said shipp, which (as they wrote) they expected, and that
in case the said shipp and goods should happen to be brought up into
England, hee should looke after and reclaime the same for them, And
otherwise hee cannot depose, saving hee was acquainted with the writing
and sending the said letter to Mr Tison.

To the fifth hee saith that the said de Estrie and Coquille are Inhabitants
of lile and subiects of the kinge of Spaine, and that the said Van Poule
was and is their factor, and was and is commonly accompted a native of
fflanders, and that the said William Meurin was and is also the
correspondent, and a subiect of the kinge of Spaine, and otherwise
hee cannot depose.

To the Interrogatories

To the first hee saith that hee being here about othre occaions, hee
was required to be examined in this businesse touching the truth by the
producents proctor, and othrewise negatively.

To the 2 hee hath knowne the producents from his infancie during
all which time they have lived in Lile, and are natives thereof, And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 3 negatively, saying hee was not at Bordeaux at the lading of
the goods in question.

To the fourth hee saith the said letter from Lile to the said Van Pulle
was written in ffrench, and otherwise cannot depose as
aforesaid.

To the 5th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoing deposition
and otherwise (saving the same) negatively.

To the 6th hee saith the said producents have formerly received other
brandewines from Bourdeaux, and the last before theise in question
were sent in the shipp Usedome Pasque Alberte master, and hee
never knew them receive any nor any consigned unto them for the
accompt of any of the subiects of the kinge of ffrance or of the
States of the united Netherlands, and saith
that they have alsoe received brandewines from Bourdeaux from the said Van Paulle for their owne
accompt in the shipps of Maurice Castensm and of Yonge Boare, which
are arived at dunquirke, namely 20 peeces in the said Yonge Boare and
25 in Maurice Castens, and those in the Usedome are 30 peeces, and for
their owne proper accompt alsoe.

To the 7 negatively, referring himselfe to his foregoing deposition, and saying
that the said producents themselves must beare the adventure of the goods
in question.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.501v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

Nicholas de Haze (merchant of Lile) dwelling at Amsterdam, and desireth
payment thereof accordingly, and shorty they receaved advice from the
said de Haze from Amsterdam that he had received the said bill of
exchange, whereupon they wrote to him that they accepte it, and wrote
to the same effect to the said Van Poulle, and accordingly tot remitt all
the money by exchange to Amsterdam to the sayd de Haze, And
otherwise saving as aforesaid hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 20th day of March 1653

On the behalfe of Conrade)
Esser Guillam Van Heere)
and others owners of the shipp)
the Angell Gabriell of Hamburgh)
whereof Hendrick Broeck)
is Master, and of her lading)
on board her now remayning)
in the Downes.)

Hendrick Broeck of Hamburgh
Mariner master of the sayd shipp
Angel Gabriel, aged thirty four yeares
or thereabouts sworne in Court before
the Judges of the High Court of
Admiralty of England and examined
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath as
followeth videlicet.

That the sayd shipp the Angell Gabriel doth belong to the Port of
Hamburgh and so hath done for theis nyne or ten yeares nowe
past and during all which tyme the foresayd Conrad
Esser a Burgher of Hamburgh and a subiect of the free state
thereof hath bene and att present is the lawfull owner proprietor
and possessor of three fourth parts of the sayd shipp the Angell
Gabriell and so accounted. And that for all the sayd tyme Casten
Groube a Burgher of Hamburgh whilest he lived was and
after his death till about the beginning of January last past his widdow
was, the lawfull owner of the other fourth part of the sayd shipp
and had the quiet possession thereof, and that about the beginning
of January lasy past 1653 old stile he this deponent (who was
and is a Native and Burgher of Hamburgh and a subiect of the
ffree state thereof) did buy the sayd fourth part of the sayd shipp
formerly as aforesayd belonging to the sayd Casten Groube (who
was the former master of her) of and from the widdow of the
sayd Groube and payd to her for the same one thousand markes
Luybeks
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.502r Annotate
Luybecke, and thereby became and evere sithence hath bene and att present
is the lawfull owner of the sayd fourth part and likewise master of the
sayd shipp. And saith that the foresayd Conrade Esser and the sayd
Guilliam van Heere who was and is a Burgher of Hamburgh and a subiect of the free state thereof and this deponent in the moneth of ffebruary
last past did att Hamburgh lade on board the sayd shipp the goods
wares and merchandizes now on board her being wheat wax
some small parcells of sugar, some Russia leather Candles, peices
of wood and some other things all for their owne accompt, the
farr greatest part being for accompt of the sayd Esser and Van Heere
all to be in the sayd shipp transported to Bayon in ffrance and
there delivered for accompt of the sayd Conrad Essser Guilliam
Van Heere and this deponent. And saith that the sayd shipp having
taken in the sayd goods att Hamburgh departed therewith from
thence about fourteene dayes since for Bayon, and about
8 dayes since arrived in the Downes (where she now remaynes
with her sayd lading) under conduct of this deponent as master
of her, and is bound and is to goe with her sayd goods to the
Port of Bayon aforesayd there to discharge the same for accompt aforesayd
and to noe other port or place nor for anyother accompt
whatsoever. And Lastly saith that noe Hollander or other subiect
of the States of the United Provinces nor ffrench man or other
subiect of the ffrench King had or hath any right title share
or interest in the sayd shipp the Angell Gabriel or her
lading, or any part thereof, nor any other person or persons
whatsoever but the sayd Conrade Esser Guilliam van Heere and this 
deponent (who are all Inhabitants of Hamburgh with their wifes and familyes),
and that this deponent hath Interest onely in two small cases
of sugar, about one hundred pound weight of wax and three
hundred Cheeses part of the sayd lading, the rest wholly belonging
to the sayd Conrade Esser and Guilliam van Heer.

Hinrick Vom brock [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 22th day of March 1653.

On the behalfe of Peter Julius)
Coiet and others subiects of the)
Queene of Sweden touching )
certaine shipp called the)
Ongermerland of Stockhollme)
(whereof John Cornelison is Master))
ffrancklyn)

Examined upon the Interrogatories
remaining in the Registry of this Court
and given in on the behalfe of the sayd
Peter Julius Coiet and Company.

John Cornelison of Stockholme in Swethland
Mariner master of the sayd shipp the Ongermerland
aged thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatory This deponent saith he knoweth well the
interrate shipp the Ongermerland being master of her, which
shipp he saith belongeth to the Port of Stockhollom in Swethland
and her Owners are Peter Julius Coiel, Jan Sylvesyterne
Anthony Bruyn Abraham van Eyke and Secretary Tonghell , which
sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.502v Annotate
To the second Interrogatory he saith that the sayd shipp came from and
began this her outwards voyage from Stockholme with her
present lading of goods being Iron pitch tarr Copper shott and
Salmon, which were all laden, and putt on board the sayd shipp
att Stock hollome aforesd, for accompt of Abraham and Jacob
Mumma the sayd Peter Julius Coiet and Anthony Brain all
Inhabitants and merchants of Stock hollome all to be unladen
att this port of London whither she was bound and where she now is the foresayd Salmon
excepted which is to be transported to Burdeaux and there
unladen and delivered to Jan Van Pullen a factor for
the sayd Swedish merchants there residing. And otherwise cannot
depose saving that the foresayd Iron pitch tarr Copper and shott
is part delivered and the remainder now a delivering and to
be delivered to John Bock and Company and Mr Smith all
merchants residing in this Citty of London. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatoy he saith the foresayd shipp is now bound to the
port of Burdeaux and is there to take in a lading of wynes
and other goods for accompt of the sayd Abraham and Jacob
Mumma Peter Julius Cojet and Anthony Bruyn to be carryed
from thence to Stockhollom aforesayd and there delivered to the
sayd persons videlicet the sayd Mummaes, Cojet and Bruyn. And further
saith that for the providing of the sayd wines and goods att Burdeaux
the foresd John Bock and Company are to furnish moneyes and
remitt the same to the foresayd Jan Van Pullen att Burdeaux
who is to lade the sayd wynes and goods there. And otherwise
he cannot depose

Jan Cornelissen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

Charles Marescoe of Saint Nicholas Lane London
merchant aged 21 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

rpt.

To the sayd Interrogatoryes This deponent saith that Abraham and Jacob
Mumma and Company merchants of Stock hollom in Swethland
did for their owne accompt lade on board the sayd shipp the
On?yermerland John Cornelison Master, att the sayd port of
Stockhollom part of a shipps lading of Iron pitch tarr Copper
and shott all consigned to this port of London, and that the sayd
shipp is safely arrrived therewith att this port, and the most part
of the sayd goods are allready delivered and the remaynder are
in delivering to John Bock and Company and one Mr Smith
merchants residing in this Citty. And that there are likewise
some Quantityes of salmon on board the sayd shipp consigned for
like
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.503r Annotate
like accompt to John van Pullen of Burdeaux. to which port
the foresayd shipp is now to goe there to take in a lading of wynes
and other goods to returne with the same to Stock holme for
accompt of the foresayd merchants of Stock hollome subiects of the
Queene of Sweden. And saith that for the buying of the sayd
wynes att Burdeaux the foresayd John Bock and Company are
to furnish moneyes and remitt the same to the sayd John van pullen
att Burdeaux; The premisses he deposeth being the factor
and Correspondent of the sayd Abraham and Jacob Mumma
and Company, and having some of the sayd goods arrived and delivered
att this port in manner as aforesayd, and being privy to the order
given by the sayd Swedish merchants for remitting of the sayd moneyes
in manner and for the use aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

Chareles Marescoe [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 13th of Aprill 1654
On the behalfe of William Bradick)
and others touching a losse in the Anne)
of London)

Rp.

William Ware of Shadwell in the parish
of Stepney and County of Middlesex mariner
aged 40 yeares or thereabouts, sworne before
the right worshipfull William Clarke and John
Godolphin doctors of lawes Judges of the
Admiraltie saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet.

To the first, second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth
that hee well knewe and was master of the good shipp the Anne
of London interrogated, and had knowne her about nine monethes and
was master of her about seaven monethes before her seizure hereafter mentioned
And saith that shee departed from the Canary Ilands on the voyage
interrogated bound for this port of London on or about the sixth of
december last past, and comming about seaven weekes after such
here departure into the mouth of the Channell about 16 or 18
leagues short of Scilly, shee was met withall, set upon and
seized by a man of warr from Brest having a Commission
as her Captaine (named James dillan) said, from the duke of Yorke,
and having such Commission hee dischardged the person of this deponent the
master of her after hee came into Bl?oau?e?t in ffrance, whether
hee the said dillan and company carried the said shipp and all her
lading and confiscated the same, and landed her goods, and sold the
vessell, soe that the same were and are utterly lost to the owners
thereof; which hee knoweth being master and seeing the premisses soe donne.
And saith hee well knoweth the interrogated William Bradick merchant
and hath soe donne for theise 16 yeares last or thereabouts, and saith that
there were 38 pipes of wine, nineteene or twenty tonnes of barrells pitch
in caske, 82 drie west India hides, and 14 chests of sugar laden at
the Canarie Islands for the accompt of the said mr Bradick, by one James
Co?use the said mr Bradicks factor there, and
consigned
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.503v Annotate
consigned to be here delivered to the said Mr Bradick or his assignes,
which hee knoweth becasue hee sawe the lading thereof, and being master
as aforesaid, received the same aboard for the said Mr Brodickes accompt
and signed bills of lading for the same, which bills and all other his
papers and writings were alsoe seized and taken away by the said
Dillon

Wm Ware [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 13th of Aprill 1654.

On the behalfe of Roger Hatton of)
London merchant concerning the losse)
of the shipp Expedition of Plimouth)

Rp.

William Sowden of Plimouth Mariner
master of the shipp the Welfare of the
said port, aged 36 yeares or thereabouts

To the first, second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that hee
well knewe the shipp interrogated, the Expedition of Plimouth
whereof George Mathewes was master, at the time of her last
being at the Island of Zant in the Mediteranean seas, and saith
shee departed thence on or about the thirteenth of ffebruary last
past old stile, bound for this port of London and here to make
her dischardge of her lading of Currance. And saith that in her
right course of proceeding from Zant for this said port, comming
about fourtie leagues off the Rock of Lisbone, shee was met
withall and set upon by a man of warr having Holland colours
and about 26 guns, and soe was this deponents said shipp the
Welfare which came in company of the Expedition, and after
about two howres hott fight betweene the said man of warr (which endeavoured to take them) on
the one part and the Expedition and the Welfare on the other
the said shipp the Expedition being extremely battered
and torne with the fight, sunck with her said lading of currance
downe in the sea and soe shee and her lading were and are utterly
lost, and this hee saith happened on the seaventeenth day
of March last past of the stile aforesaid; All which hee knoweth
because hee this deponent in his said shipp the Welfare went out
from England the said voyage in company of the Expedition and
was in her companie at Zant and saw her take in her said
lading, and carrie thence in her companie bound alsoe for this [?port]
and was present and active (as master of the Welfare) in the
said fight and sawe the said shipp Expedition sincke, and [?doe ?did]
her men in this deponents said shipp, And saith that the
[?boughes] and masts of the enemie (the said man of warr) were alsoe torne
and the shipp very much shattered, soe that shee fell off, and
as this deponent beleeveth shee alsoe afterwards sanck, but this deponent
could not see what became of her by reason the night was come and
that hee quickly lost sight of her.

William [?GoodXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.504r Annotate
The same day.

2.

George Morshed of Milbrooke neere Plimouth in the County
of Devon Sailer, aged 35 yeeres or thereabouts, sworne
and examined as aforesaid, saith and deposeth as followeth
videlicet.

To the first, second and third Interrrogatories hee saith and deposeth that
hee well knew the shipp the Expedition of Plimouth interrogated
whereof George Mathewes was master at the time of her last being
in the Island of Zant in the Mediterranean seas, and saith that after
shee had staid there about a moneth or six weekes in
expecting and taking in her ladinge of currance, shee departed
thence about eight weekes since in company of the shipp the
Welfare of Plimouth whereof his precontest William
Sowden was and still is master, both bound for this port of London
to dischardge; and saith that in their course of proceedinge from
Zant for this port, comming about fourtie leagues off the
shore of Portugall, the said shipp the Expedition was
met with set upon at sea and assaulted by an enemie
a man of warr carrying the hollands colours, which endeavoured
by fight to take the Expedition, who made stout defence and
resistance with the aide of the Welfare, and saith the said
man of warr twice or thrice boarded the Expedition, yet with
her owne resistance and the welfares plying the man of
warr with frequent shott and broad sides, the said man of warr
was beaten off againe, but at length the Expedition being
extreamely battred and torne, sanck downe with her ladinge
of currance into the sea, and soe the same were and are utterly
lost. The premisses hee deposeth and knoweth to be true for
that hee this deponent was then Quarter master of the Welfare
and in her went out from Plimouth in companie of the Expedition
and staid with her in Zant where this deponent sawe
the Expedition take in her said lading of currants, and sawe her about
eight weekes since depart the same in company of the said shipp
the welfare which was alsoe laden with currance and
sawe the said fight and the sinking of the Expedition and lading
hee being as aforesaid Quarter master of the Welfare and active
in the said fight against the said enemie the man of warr, which
was alsoe very much battered, and as this deponent beleeveth
afterwards perished by sinking, but this deponent could not see
what became of her by reason of the night which was come  on
and was darke. and saith the said fight and sinking of the
said shipp Expedition and lading happened about eight and
twenty dayes since, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

'GM' [MARKE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.504v Annotate
The same day.

Rp.

William Ginnis of Melbrooke neere Plimouth in the
County of Devon shipp wright, aged one and twenty
yeeres or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the first, second and third Interrogatories hee saith hee well knoweth
the shipp the Expedition (whereof George Mathewes was master)
at the time of her last being at the Iland of Zant interrogated
where hee saith shee tooke in her lading of currance, and that
about eight weekes since departed thence in company of the shipp
the Welfare (William Souden master) both bound for this port of
London to dischardge, and that in their right course of proceeding
from Zant for this port, comming about 30 or 40 leagues off
the rock of Lisbone or Southerne Cape of the Portugall [?shore]
the said two shipps were met withall and set upon by an
[?enemie] a man of warr having the hollands colours out,
which endeavoured to take him, but they made good resistance
and maintained a fight of two houres continuance at leat
with the said man of warr, but saith that at length the
Expedition being much battered and burnt with the fight shee
and her lading sunck downe in the sea in the sight of this deponent
who was Carpenter of the Welfare and active in the
said fight in defense of the said two shipps, and sawe all the
premisses soe had and donne as aforesaid, going all the said
voyage in companie of the Expedition to the time of her said
perishing in the sea, wherein shee and her lading were and
are utterly lost. and saith that the said fight
and losse of the Expedition and lading happened on the seaventeenth
day of Mrch last. And otherwise hee cannot depose.
----
The 13th of Aprill 1654

The claime of John Cole for the)
Saint Joseph and lading)
ffrancklin. Smith.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the said Cole

Rp.

.1

Roger Cole of the citie of London Merchant, aged
51 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the seaventh article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee hath knowne the producent John Cole from the infancie
of him the said John who was borne at [?Colourpton] in the County
of Devon and was and is the sonne of John Cole of the same
gentleman who was and is the elder brother of him this deponent
and for the time of his birth hee saith it was the 15 of [?July]
1622 as by a note thereof many yeeres since sent to this deponent
for
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.505r Annotate
from the said Johns father (who is yet living at Colompton) may
further appeare, and for an Englishman borne hee the said producent
was and is Commonly accompted. And saith the said John Cole
the producent hath for some yeeres past lived at Cane in Normandy
as a merchant stranger and factor to this deponent and other
English merchants, and that after the seizure in question hee
the John came over to London about his merchant affaires and
to make his claime for the said shipp and goods, namely hee
came over about two monethes before Christmas last, and hath
bin ever since in England about his said occasions, and for a
merchant stranger and factor at Cane hee was and is commonly
accompted and reputed.

Roger Cole [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the said allegation.

Rp.

2

Samuel Hazard of the parish of Mary Magdalen
Bermondsea in the County of Surrie Leatherseller
aged 50 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined

To the seaventh article of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee this deponent hath well knowne the producent about seaven yeeres
last, and well knoweth his father John Cole and his mother
who are yet living at Colompton in the County of devon
where this deponent hath bin at their house, and well
knoweth alsoe the said John the producent his brothers and sisters
and his precontest Roger Cole the said Johns
unckle, at whose house this deponent hath often seene him
the said John the producent and heard him call the said Roger unckle; and when this deponent
was soe at the huse of the said John the father about 7
yeeres since (whether hee went in company of the said Roger Cole
(the said producents fathers brother) hee heard him the said
John the father and his wife speaking of their children say
that hee the said John (speaking of the partie producent) was
their eldest sonne. And for an Englishman borne, and to
have lived some late yeares at Cane as a merchant
stranger

[ADD DATA]

Sam: Hassard [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest before doctors Clarke
and Godolphin.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.505v Annotate
The third of May 1654.

ffortune of Embden)
ffolkert hemmis)

ffolkart hemmis of Embden Mariner, master of the shipp
the ffortune of Embden, aged 23 yeares or thereabouts
sworne in Court the day abovesaid, saith and deposeth
by vertue of his  oath.

That hee this deponent at the time of the seizure of his said shipp
the ffortune of Emden by Captaien Skinner, had aboard the said
shipp the ffortune a Seabrief or passe from Emden under the seale
of that citie, alsoe an attestation thence under the same seale, a
Charter partie for his voyage from Emden to Nantes, and backe
againe to Emden, a letter from
Mr Van Galle and John Vander Maze (the factors that laded her
at Nantes) directed to Derrick and John Budle his reighters at
Emden or to one of them, together with a bill of lading for the
wines and other goods aboard, which bill this deponent sawe
inclosed and sealed up in the said letter at Nantes, Alsoe a bill
of sale of the said shipp made unto her owners of Embden and
a passe from Generall Penn, given him by the said Generall meeting
this deponent in his outward voyage, together with a [?bezam]
or ffrench Cocquett; All which hee this deponent with his owne
hands upon the said seizure delivered to the said Captaine Skinner
about sixteene dayes since, and the said Captaine tooke
and detained the same from this deponent, and hath them still
in his custodie (saving the cocket which this deponent hath lately
seene in this Court) or hath otherwise disposed thereof.

volchert hemmis [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The third day of May 1654

On the behalfe of Mr Westcombe)
touching the Mary John de [?Colonque]

Rp.

Martin Westcombe of Mincing Lane London
merchant aged 30 yeares or thereabouts sworne
before the right worshipfull William Clerke
and John Godolphin Doctors of Lawes and
Judges of the High Court of Admiralty and examined
saith and deposeth by vertue of his oath

That by a letter of advise and a bill of lading that came therein
which he receyved in this Citty about twelve dayes agoe sent to
him from John Wescomb this deponents factor residing att
Bayon in ffrance, the sayd John Wescomb did and doth [?XXXX]
this deponent

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.506r Annotate
of feathers and forty one thousand pounds of pitch all for the
proper accompt of this deponent to be delivered att this Port of
London, and that he had given order to the skipper to touch att
Plymouth or Dartmouth: And he further saith that the sayd
Letter and bill of lading were and are true and reall. and that
the sayd vessell doth really belong to this deponent, and that the
sayd goods were laden by this deponents order, and doe truly belong
to him and that he alone doth run the hazard and advenure
thereof. And lastly saith that according to the foresayd letter of
advise he is given to understand that the foresayd vessell for the
better securing her and her foresayd goods from the ffrench and
Dutch men of warr was and is manned  by a ffrench master and
ffrench Mariners.

Martin Wescombe [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The third day of May 1654. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Daniel Slegall)
for the shipp the Peter.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Gerrard Menschever of Stockhollom in Swethland
Secretary to the Agent of the Queene of Sweden
Resident here in England aged 36 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined saith and
deposeth by vertue of his oath as followeth videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that being att 
Stockhollom in the yeare 1644 in the which yeare and for some tyme
after there was open warr and hostility betwixt the Queene of Sweden
and King of Denmarke he well remembreth that he saw within
the sayd yeare 1644 the arlate shipp the Saint Peter (whereof Matthias
Cornelison is or late was master) brought into Stockholme as a
prize by one Captaine Lutziffer and another Captaine in the service
of the Queene of Sweden, who had taken the same att sea from
the King of Denmarke to whom formerly she
did belong. And he likewise well knoweth that Daniel Slegall
arlate was Commissary Generall in the parts of Pomeren of the
sayd Queenees Armada and that for his service therein he was
advanced by her Majesty of Sweden to the dignity of a Nobleman, and
had the sayd shipp the Saint Peter and propriety of the same assigned and made over to him and
so became possest thereof (which was done (as this deponent conceyveth)
in allowance  of
moneyes expended by him in furnishing her Majestyes Navie with provisions in the sayd service, which this
deponent came to know and take notice of living then in Stockhollom
as aforesayd, and being severall tymes in Company of the sayd Daniel
Slagall in his treaties with the officers for the Treadury of her
sayd Majesty of Sweden for and touching the sayd shipp, and afterwards
saw
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.506v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The fifth day of May .1654 [CENTRE HEADING]

A Busines of Ensurance promoted)
On the part and behalfe of Garret Van hoven)
of dublin merchant concerning a losse in)
the shipp the Samuell of Chester.)

Examined upon Certaine Interrogatories  [?XXX]
on the behalfe of the sayd Garret Van Hoven

1.

William Bushell of Liverpool in the County of Lancaster
late Master and Owner of the shipp the Patrick of Liverpoole and

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.507r Annotate
To the first Interrogatory This deponent saith that he knewe well the vessell the
Samuell of Chester whereof the interrate Samuell Wright was master att
the tyme of her last being att Dublin in Ireland, and the sayd vessell the
Samuel was bound from thence on a voyage to Nants or Rochell ffrance
the premisses he knoweth being late Master of the shipp Patrick of Leverpoole
and was att Dublin the tyme interrate when the Samuel was last there and
sayled from thence in Company of the Samuell and was bound with his
shipp the Patrick to Nantes aforesayd And otherwise cannot depose.

To the second Interrogatory This deponent saith that whilest he was att Dublin
the tyme aforesayd he saw and observed that the interrogate Garret
Van Hoven of  Dublin merchant was one of the freighters of the sayd
vessell the Samuel and that he did lade and putt on board her
in December and January last past a good quantity of herrings for his owne accompt to be from thence
transported to Nantes or Rochel in ffrance. but to whom the same
were consigned knoweth not. And otherwise saving his subsequent depositions he cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatory This deponent saith that the interrate ship the Samuell
having taken in her lading att Dublin did departe in safety
therewith about the middle of January last past in Company of this deponents sayd shipp the Patrick
upon her sayd Intended voyage for Nantes or Rochell, And this
deponent hath credibly heard and upon very sufficient grounds beleiveth
it to be true that the Samuell in her Course thitherwards was seized
by some Man of Warr an enemy or Pirat by meanes whereof
the foresayd Herrings belonging to Garrett Van Hoven as aforesayd
were and are wholly lost to him and allso the sayd shipp to the true Owners thereof And otherwise or further hee
saith he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.507v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories.

2.

Samuel Wright of Nesson in the County of Chester Mariner late Master
of the shipp Samuell of Chester  aged 22 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne before the Judges of the High Court of Admiralty as by the Acts of Court and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.508r Annotate
A.3.

The 10th of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

[?XXX] and company against the Oastwould'.)

2.

Captaine John Welch of the parish of
Stepney in the County of Middlesex Mariner
aged 25 yeares or thereabouts sworne
and examined.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 13th of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined  upon the allegation aforesaid.

3.

Sheldon Keightley of the parish of Saint Catherins neere the Tower
of London Chirurgeon, aged 21 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.508v Annotate
[an anchor neare her, and manned out his boate to seize her, which the master
and company of the Oastwould seeing, they cutt cables in hawse and
endeavoured to run ashore, which being perceived by the said Captaine [?Wolley]
and company, they cut cables alsoe and sailed after her, and ran [?XXXXX]
aboard her, and then boarding her with the said shipp
the Mary, the master and company of the Oastwould on the other side
of their shipp (which had the hollands Ensigne out) betooke them selves
to their boate, and notwithstanding the endeavour of the said Captaine
and company to hinder them, ran ashore and soe escaped, and by that
meanes there could none of them be brought home hether, And saith
that the said seizure was made on the open seas, and that the master
and company of the [?XXXXX] [?XXXX] (who confessed their shipp and goods
to be ollands) affirmed that the Oastwould and lading were good prize
as they, and that shee and lading were alsoe belonging to holland.
All which hee knoweth to be true, being Chirurgeon of the Mary
and present at the premisses and seeing and hearing the same soe
acted and donne as aforesaid. And otherwise hee cannot depose.

Repeated with his precontest before dorctor Clarke and
doctor Godolphin.

Shell [?Keyhtley] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 15:th day of ffebruary .1653:- [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of John Baptista Youncker and)
others of Hamborough ffor the Vessell called)
the Kint, whereof John Kint is Master and)
her tackle and furniture lately seized by the
Mermaide in the service of the Commonwealth)
and brought to Yarmouth. Suckley. Budd.)

Examined upon an Allegation
given on the behalfe of the said
Claymers:-/

j.us/

John Kint of Hamborough Mariner
Master of the said shipp the Kint aged
40. yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined saith as followeth videlicet:-

To the first article of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth
That in March Aprill and May 1653. last past. this deponent
having order and direction from the arlate John Baptista Youncker
and others Merchants of Hamborough went from Hamborough
to Amsterdam, and there bought the shipp the Kint alias the Child
arlate and now in question, of Hendrick de La Sales, one named
de Becker and Lagarde Bellin Marchants of Amsterdam
for the use and accompt of the said John Baptista Youncker
(Hendrick
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.509r Annotate
Hendrick Peterson Smith, Lewis de Bois and this deponent who on
the behalfe of himselfe and his Partners aforesaid payed for the said shipp
unto the said Merchants of Amsterdam the former reputed Owners thereof
the summe of three thousand and two hundred Guilders hollands money, and
after the buying thereof this deponent by direction from his said Partners the
Owners and Proprietors of the said shipp carried men and Provisions from
Hamborough to Amsterdam expressely to fetch the said shipp the Kint from
thence to Hamburgh, and saith that the said shipp being in her Course
from Amsterdam to Hamburgh neare unto the River of Elve ws surprized
and taken by the shipp the Mermaide in the immediate service of this
Commonwealth, And saith That since the buying and paying for the said
shipp as aforesaid this deponent and partners aforesaid have bin and at
present are the true and lawfull Owners of the said shipp, and of
her tackle apparell and furniture, and for such commonly accompted
reputed and taken, which hee knoweth being Master of the said
shipp the Kint ever since shee was bought and payed for as aforesaid
And otherwise cannot depose:-/

To the second hee saith and deposeth, That shortly after the said seizure
by the said shipp the Mermaide by Captaine John King hee the said King
and Companie plundered the said Vessell the Kint, and tooke out and
from the same one new Cable of about eight inches thicke, and about
one hundred and twenty five fathoms long, worth at the time of the said
seizure twenty foure pounds sterling, and one other Cable having not
bin much used worth twenty two pounds, a new Cable with a halser
worth twelve pounds, two troessers new each worth two pounds eight
shillings, as much small cordage for a Top saile as was worth seaven
poundes, three castinge lines with three leads, worth one pound sixteen
shillings, fower maine tackes, fower sheets and a maine Topsaile [?XXX] for saile
all of them new with two boey ropes worth two pounds, a new forsaile a
bonnet and a for topsaile with a boat saile worth thirty eight pounds
one Casting anker with a Rodger worth fower pounds fower shillings
Two barrells of Powder bulletts match and all the appurtenances
thereunto belonginge fower musketts with a long fowling peece one
paire of Pistolls and five swords, worth twenty pounds; Two barrells
of Tarr, one barrell of Pitok worth two pounds sixteene shillings
skillette Potts and Panns and other things worth sixe pounds, two flaggs
and Lanthornes and compasses and howerglasses worth five pounds, Candles
lampes two barrells of Hamborough biskuits, one barrell of Pease,
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.509v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Interrogatoryes. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatory hee answereth that hee is an hamburgher
borne and lives there and hath had a wife and family there these
seaven yeares last past, and otherwise canno answer.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.510r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 16th day of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

2

Diego de La Cruze of Cadiz in Spaine aged
about 30 yeares Steersman of the ship the
Kint a witnes sworne and Examined deposeth and
saith as followeth./

To the first article of the said  allegation hee deposeth and
saith that in or about the monethes of March Aprill and
May last past the arlate John Kint did by the order and
direction (as hee said himselfe) of John Baptista Youncker
and others of Hamborough buy the arlate shipp the Kint of one La
Gaurde and others, (whom this deponent did not well knowe) att
Amsterdam, but this deponent did well know the said La
Gaurde and saw him divers times aboard the said shipp about the tyme of the
sale thereof, and did then understand by his precontest
John Kint and others that the sayd John Kint did pay to the
said La Gaurde the summe of three thousand two hundred Guilders
hollands money for the said shipp the Kint And after she
was bought The master John KInt did goe himselfe to hamberghe and did bring from the arlate John Baptista Younker men
and provisions from Hamborough in a hoy for the victualling
of her and bringing of her about to Hamborough, which hoy
this deponent saw and saw the men that came in the
hoy to mann the said ship the Kint, and saw the provisions
delivered aboard the said ship the Kint, And saith that the said
shipp beinge in her course from Amsterdam to Hamborough
was mett with surprized and taken by the Meermayde friggot
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.511r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the interrogatoryes [CENTRE HEADING]

To the first Interrogatory hee answeareth and deposeth that hee is a native
of Cadiz in Spaine and a Subiect of his Catholike Majestie, hee is a 
bachelar, and hath his greatest residence in Hamborough, where hee
hath bin most resident these last tenn yeares. And further hee deposeth not./
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.511v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The fourth of Aprill 1654.

Pickering and company against the shipp)
the Dolphin, Christian Sola master)

Jacob Isbrandssen of Dunquirke
Mariner, stiersman of the said
vessell, aged 53 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee hath
belonged to and bin Stiersman of the shipp the Dolphin interrogate
ever since September or October last and came first aboard
her at Dunquirke,a nd was in the said qualitie of
Stiersman at the time of her seizure by Captaine Titsell
and saith the said shipp is accompted to belonge to Dunquirke
and her owners to be thre dwelling, and this deponent
knoweth ffrancis Hendrick and one Adrian of Dunquirke
who are said and accompted to be owners of her, and saith
shee was (as hee hath heard) bought as a wreck at Dunquirke about a fortnight
before this deponents said first commeing aboard her, but this
deponent did not see the buying or paying for her.

To the second hee saith the master liveth at Dunquirke and was
as hee taketh it borne at Bridges or Gannt, and this deponent
was borne at Enchusen in Holland, but hath lived 20 yeares
in Dunquirke with his wife and familie, and all the rest of
the shipps company live in fflannders for ought hee knoweth
to the contrary as hee saith, and in particular his contests
in this businesse live as hee taketh it all in Dunquirke
saving Jacob Johasen who liveth at Bergen in fflannders about 2 leagues
from Dunquirke, and otherwise ee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.512r Annotate
deponent and the rest of the cmpany to Dantzike and there to be
dischardged, but for whose accompt this deponent knoweth not, and
saith they have bin noe other port but Bordeaux since
their said departure from Dunquirke, and were at the time of
the seizure by Captaine Titsell going for Dantzike for ought
this deponent knoweth to the contrary, and saith the said shipp the
Dolphin is of the burthen of two hundred tons or thereabouts, and
had about 170 fatts of wine aboard her at the time of her seizure, And otherwise hee
cannot depose saving as aforesaid.

To the sixth hee cannot depose, saying hee knoweth not of
any bills of lading, charter partie or other writings that were aboard
save that at sea before theire seizure the master showed him
the out side of a letter which was directed to Dantzike and
said that thither they must goe/

To the 10th negatively, saying hee doth not knowe the laders
of the said goods, and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 11th negatively, saying hee knoweth not what to beleeve
touching the proprietie of the said wines, not being any wayes told
or informed touching the same, but alwaies the master would say
that the same was to be delivered at Dantzike.

To the 12th hee saith they were seized at sea off the Texel as hee
taketh, the place, they endeavouring to make the coast of Holland
and stood for the same
the winde being about West Norewest, And otherwise hee
cannot depose.

To the last negatively for his part, and otherwise hee
cannot depose.

Jacob [?Isbranssen] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

The Interrogatories in the
second place.

To the first and second
hee saith that the
Texel is not out of
the way for Dantzike

[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

2

John ffooka of Dunquirke Mariner, boatswaine of the
said shipp the Dolphin, aged 44 yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith hee hath bin boatswaine of
an hath served in the said shipp Dolphin about five monethes last
and came aboard her in the beginning of the said time at dunquirke,
and saith that ffrancis hendricksen, Ambrose Marsen merchants
of dunquirke were and are accompted owners of her and to have
bought her there bout 6 monethes since, but whether there are
any more or other owners hee saith hee knoweth not, neither
was hee present at the buying nor knoweth ought of the
payment for her, And otherwise hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.512v Annotate
Sola master of the said shipp hath lived there about twenty
yeares last , and hath bin a maried man there about 18 yeares
and saith that hee this deponent was borne at wominghen in
fflanders, and the master as hee hath hears was born at Gannt
and saith that the Carpenter is of Saint Omers and hath lived
longe in Dunquirke, and that the rest of the shipps company
are of fflanders and elsewhere in the Kinge of Spaines dominions
in the Netherlands, saving one named John Baptista who
is a Genoese.

To the  third, fourth, and 5th hee saith that the master hired
this deponent and the rest of the company at Dunquirke to serve in the
said shipp by the moneth without specification of the place
or places whether they should goe, but hired them (as the
manner there is in such cases) for 99 places, and not to be
bound to the hundreth, and saith the said shipp departed
from Dunquirke in ballast on the tenth or thereabouts of
January last, and went right to Bourdeaux, and there
tooke  in her lading of wines, which as the master said was
to be carried to and dischardged at Dantzike, but told
not this deponent for whose accompt it was, neither doth
this deponent knowe for whose accompt it was or is,
and being laden they departed towards Dantzike, and have
not bin before their seizure in any port but Bourrdeauxx
since their departure from Dunquirke, and that the said
lading consists of about 175 fatts of wine, the premisses hee
deposeth going the said voyage to Bourdeaux and seeing the
said lading and being aboard at the saizure, And otherwise
hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.513r Annotate
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories.

3

Joos de Waede of Dunkerke mariner Carpenter of the sayd
shipp the Dolphin aged 28 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

Top the 1 Interrogatory This deponent saith he was one of the Company videlicet Carpenter
of the Dolphin when she was seized and so hath bene for 3 monethes and
upwards and came first aboard her att Dunkerke; And saith that Adrian
Janson and ffrans Hendrickson of Dunkerke for all the sayd tyme have bene
and are the reputed Owners of the sayd shipp but where she was built or of
whom the bought her or how they came by her knoweth not. and saith he saw
them not pay any money for her. And further cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith he is a native of Saint Omers in Artoys, and the Skipper
is a fflandrian borne, and hath lived in Dunkerke many yeares by report
with his wife and family at which place this deponent hath lived about
ten monethes and part of the sayd tyme with his wife since deceased, and for nine
yeares next before and upwards in Spaine as a Carpenter in the King of Spaines
Armada, And beleiveth that all the Dolphins Company one Genoese
excepted are fflandrians. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith the sayd shipp begann the present voyage about 3 monethes and
an halfe, agoe from Dunkerke in her ballast bound from Bordeaux. and
further cannot depose.

To the 4th. he saith the sayd shipp tooke in her present lading of wines att
Burdeaux and hath bene att noe other port since she came from Dunkerke.

To the 5th. he saith the sayd shipp is now laden with about 160. tonnes of wine
which were laden att Burdeaux, to be discharged att dantzyck but
the names of the persons that laded the same or for whose accompt the same
was laden knoweth not. and further cannot depose

To the 6.th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 7th. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 8th. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 9th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof nor hath heard of any
such matter.

To the .10.th he saith he knoweth not nor so farr as he can tell ever saw any
of the Laders of the wines and goods in question.

To the .11th negatively to every part thereof.

To the 12th. Interrogatory he sith the sayd shipp dolphin was seized upon
the open seas by a Certaine Dogger boat commannded by Captaine
Tetzell, but what Commission the sayd Tetzell had he knoweth not. And
further cannot depose.

To the 13th. negatively to every part thereof as farr as he knoweth or
hath heard. And further cannot depose.

Joos de [MARKE] Waendt [MARKE, RH SIDE]
his marke
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

4

Dirrick Larentson of Dunkerke mariner one of the
Mariners of the sayd shipp the Dolphin aged 29 yeares
or therabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatory this deponents aith he hath belonged to the dolphin
ever since the last day of december last past upon which day he first came
on board her att dunkirke and was in her as a private Mariner att the
tyme of her seizure. And saith that mynherr Hanson and Hendrickson
of


HCA 13/68 f.513v Annotate
of Dunkerke for all the sayd tyme have bene and are the reputed owners
of the sayd shipp; but of whom they bought her or for what he knoweth
not neyther knoweth he where she was built nor by whomm. nor sawe
he any money payd for the same. And further cannot depose.

To the 2. he saith he hath heard the skipper of the shipp was borne at
Gannt, but his present dwelling is att Dunkerke where he hath his wife
and family and hath there lived 17 yeares and upwards. And this
deponent was borne att Lutzenburgh beond the Rhyne under the Crowne
of Spayne, and was brought a Child to Dunkerke where he hath lived
all his tyme videlicet from an Infancy of a yeere and a halfe old, and
there now lives with his wife and family. And beleiveth that all
or most part of the Dolphins Company are fflandrians or borne
and living in some of the adioyning Provinces under the Crowne of
Spaine one common man excepted by name John Baptista whom is
an Italian.

To the .3. 4. and 5th Interrogatories he saith that the foresayd shipp Dolphin upon
the 4th day of January last past sett sayle from Dunkerke upon her last
voyage, and fell downe to Mardeke and from thence departed in her Ballast
about the 13th day of the same moneth and in her ballast sayled directly
for Burdeaux and there receyved her present lading on board
her being 170 fatt of wyne or thereabouts, and from thence
sett sayle upon her Course for Dantzycke whither she was bound
with the sayd wynes, and in her Course was seized and brought
up into this River to Blackwell where she remayned. but
for whose accompt the sayd wines were laden, or by whom
for his part he knoweth not nor hath heard. And further or
otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.514r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories.

5

Jacob Janson of Bergen neere Dunkerke Mariner one
of the Company of the Dolphin aged 19 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To the 2. Interrogatory This deponent saith that the master of the shipp Dolphin
is a marryed man and a fflandrian borne and lives tt Dunkerke
with his wife and family and so hath done many yeares, and this
deponent is a native of Enchuison but hath lived at Bergen in fflanders
being about a Dutch mile from Dunkerke for theis ten yeares
last past and upwards and is a Bachelor, and conceyveth that all
the rest of the Dolphins Company (one Genoese exxcepted) are
Natives and Inhabitants of fflanders and Provinces adioyning
under the Crowne of Spaine.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.514v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

6

Anthony Sola of Dunkerke mariner one of the
Company of the Dolphin aged 23 yeares a witnes
sworne and examine deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To the .2. he saith the master of the Dolphin was borne att
Gannt and liveth with his wife and family att Dunkerke and
so hath done 17 yeares and more, and this deponent was borne
att Dunkerke and there hath lived all this last yeare a bacheler, and
for 11 yeares was before att Bruges with his father and the sayd shippes Company are all of them fflemmings as he
beleiveth and knoweth noe other. And further cannot.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.515r Annotate
The 5th of Aprill 1654

On the behalfe of Mr)
Hovell.)

Rp.

William Hovell of Kingsale in Ireland Merchant
aged 40 yeares or thereabouts sworne before the right worshipfull
William Clerke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the High Court of the Admiraltie saith and
deposeth by vertue of his oath

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.515v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 5th of Aprill 1653.

On the behalfe of Wolfraet and)
others touching the Saint Marke.)

Rp.

Marke Heytman of Stralsund in Sweden
Mariner, master of the shipp the Saint Marke of
Straelsund, aged 50 yeares or thereabouts sworne
in Court, saith as followeth videlicet

That hee this deponent about a moneth since tooke in his said
shipps lading of salt at Rochell to be thence transported to Stralesund
for the account of his said shipps owners who hee saith are [?XXX]
Wolfraet factor for the Queene of Sweden at Stralesund and
Burgemaster of the said place, Joachim Dade on of the Magistrates
of the said towne, and Hennick Cleve merchant a Burgher of the
same towne, all subiects of the Queene of Sweden

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.516v Annotate
The sixth day of Aprill 1654

James Pickering against the)
Dolphin)

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

7.)

Jean Baptista Buten of Genoa mariner one of
the Company of the said shipp the Dolphin aged 27 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Interrogatory This deponent saith he was one of the Company of the
Dolphin att the tyme of her seizure as a Common Mariner and so hath
bene from the beginning of this present yeare att which tyme hee
first came on board the same att Dunkerke, and being a Genoese
and having never seene the sayd shipp before cannot further depose
saving he never saw any money payd for her.

[ADD DATA]

To the second Interrogatory This deponent saith That whilest the shipp the
Dolphin remayned att Burdeaux by reason of the warr betwixt fflanders
and ffrance, she did passe att Burdeaux for a shipp of Middleburgh
And further cannot depose.

Jean '+' Baptista Butin his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.517r Annotate
The same day

Examined upon the sayd Interrogatories

8.

Lewis Elze of Dunkirke mariner one of the Company
of the shipp Dolfin aged 24 yeares or threabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.518r Annotate
The 5th of Aprill 1653.

.j.us

John Meynerson of Euchusen in Holland
Mariner master of the said shipp aged
29 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined.

To the first Interrogatorie hee saith and deposeth that hee ws one of the
companie, namely a common man of the said shippe the Earle of
Holstein at the time of her seizure, and came first aboard her at
Laesterdeep in Holsteinland about the 20th of March last new
stile

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.518v Annotate
The sixth of Aprill 1654

On the behalfe of Mr Chorbet and)
others touching masts to be imported)

Rp.

1

Thomas Corbet of London merchant aged fourtie one
yeares or thereabouts sworne before the right Worshipfull
William Clerke and John Godolphin doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie and
examined upon certaine Interrogatories concerning the
lading of certaine masts which are to be brought
from beyond the seas saith and deposeth as
followeth

To the first, second, and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth
that hee this deponent together with George Prince of London
Merchant have contracted and agreed with the Commissioners
of the Navy of the State and Commonwealth of England
to bring masts for shipps from parts beyond the seas into England and to serve the same into the States stores for the servinge of the navy of England which agreement and contract was made the sixth of january
last namely for fourtie two greate masts, and by the said contract
this deponent and the sauid Mr prince were and to to have libertie
to bringe in the said masts in any forreigne bottomes that they could
gett or procure for that service. And saith that in order to the
said contract this deponent by and with the approbation of the
said Mr Prince hath freighted three holland shipps one named
the Wheele of ffortune Timon Sytges master, another
the new Putter f Malqueren in Holland Evert Sibrandsen master
and the third the hunter of Malquerene aforesaid, Herty Peters
master, all which were freighted at Amsterdam by
William Watson and Richard Bridgman this deponents factors
and correspondents there, as by their letters of advise to that
purpose sent to this deponent may and doth appeare

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.519r Annotate
same day.

2

Owen LLoid of London servant to his precontest Thomas
Corbet aged 26 yeares or therabouts, sworne and eexamined
as aforesaid, saith as followeth videlicet/

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.519v Annotate
The eighth of Aprill 1654

Pickering and company against the)
Dolphin aforesaid)

10.

Christian Sola of Dunquirke Mariner master
of the said shipp the Dolphin aged 43 yeares or thereabouts
sworne as aforesaid, saith and deposeth as
followeth videlicet./

To the first and second Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that
Michael Adriansson and ffrancis Hendrickson of Dunquirke subiects of
the Kinge of Spaine and merchants Inhabiting in Dunquirke, were
and are the owners of the said shipp the Dolphin and of her tackle
and furniture, and as owners fitted and sett out the said shipp and
constituted this deponent master thereof; And saith that the said
shipp about Michaelmas last was by fowle weather stranded without
the haven of Dunquirke, and being there wrecked the skipper thereof
a Holander exposed the same (being a shipp of fflisland) to publique sale
as shee lay wrecked, and this deponents foresaid owners bought
her of him, and about a fortnight after the said buying they brought
her into the said haven of Dunquirke and constituted this deponent
master of her, and fitted and furnished her for that voyage in question
but this deponent did not see the money paid for her, nor was
a witnesse to the bill of sale. And saith that the said ffrancis
Hendrickson hath bin an Inhabitant and married man and houskeeper
in Dunquirke for theise 20 yeares last past and upwards of this
deponents ight and knowledge, but for the said Michael Adrianson
this deponent hath often heard of his name as an Inhabitant there
for severall yeares past, but hath not knowne him above a yeare
last, And otherwise hee cannot depose, saving this
deponent  the master
of the said shipp was borne at Gannt in fflanders, and hath lived
in Dunquirke about 24 yeares last and bin a maried man there
about 18 yeares last, and that the rest of his company are all
fflemings saving one who is a Genoese, and most of them are
dwelling in Dunquirke, and some of them have wives and families
there.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.520v Annotate
The 15th of Aprill 1654.

A businesse of examination of witnesses)
touching the late seizure of the shipp)
Saint John Baptiste of London John Clawson master
promoted by Arnold Beake and company against)
Captaine Sedgewick and Captaine Leverett.)
Suckley.)

Examined upon an allegation
on the behallfe of the said
Mr Beake.

1

John Clawson of Dantzike Mariner
Master of the said shipp ahed 35 yeares
or thereabouts, sworne and examined
saith and deposeth as followeth.

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith and deposeth
that hee this deponent about eight monethes since, having
sold a shipp (whereof hee was formerly master) at Dantzik, came
thence to this port in August last to buy another, and
meeting with Mr Arnold Beake of this citie merchant, the said
Mr Beake told him that seeing hee this deponent was a
batchelour and a dantziker and one of whom hee had heard a
good report, hee the said Mr Beake and companie would furnish
him with a shipp and send him out in their service, which this
deponent yeelding unto, Mr Beake for himselfe and
company bought shortly after the shipp the Saint John Baptist
arlate of the Commissioners for prize goods here in this citie
the same having bin brought as prize to this Commonwealth
by the name (as hee taketh it) of the Golden Lilly, taken from
the hollanders, with which buying this deponent was  acquainted
being then here present in this citie and staying for the said shippe
And saith that the said shipp (then lying at dover)
being soe bought by and for accompt of the said Arnold Beake and
company namely Elias Beake and John Dolius of this citie
merchants and Michael de Haze and Thomas Greene
merchants of Dover, the said Mr Beake and rest of his company
here constituted this deponent master of her and sent him downe
to Dover to the said Mr de Haze and Mr Greene, who upon
his comming there gave him possession of her, and saith the said
persons before named were and are the owners and proprietors
of the said shipp the Saint John Baptist and of her tackle and furniture
and for such commonly accompted. And further that the premisses
being soe donne, the said Mr Beake and company before named
in or about the moneth of January last past (English stile) set
out the said shipp from the port of Dover arlate under
the conduct of this deponent with a cargazone of goods for the
said owners accompt to be carried to Bayon or Saint Sebastians, and this deponent having
provided himselfe of mariners which hee met and hired [?at ?Dover]
and received the said lading aboard departed and sailed to and
safely arrived at Bayon in the dominion of the Kinge of ffrance
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.522v Annotate
The 17th of Aprill 1654.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

2

Hance Sente of Masterland in Norway Mariner,
Gunner of the said shipp the Saint John Baptist, aged
34 yeares or thereabouts, sworne and examined, saith
and deposeth as followeth, videlicet

[ADD DATA]

Elias Beake of London and Michaell de Haze of Dover
merchants, and saith that they and company were and are commonly
accompted and reputed the true and lawfull owners and proprietors
of the said shipp the Saint John Baptist'...

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.523v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 18th of Aprill 1654.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

3

John Albertson of ffrederickstadt in Norway sailor
late one of the company of the said shipp the Saint John
Baptist, aged 25 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined as aforesaid saith and deposeth as
followeth

To the first, second and third articles of the said allegation hee
saith and deposeth that hee well knoweth the producent
Michaell de Haze of dover, and hath seene and knoweth the
producents Arnold and Elias Beake of London merchants
And saith that the said de Haze, Arnold and Elias Beake
and companie (merchants of London and dover) were and are
commonly reputed the true and lawfull owners of the shipp
the Saint John Baptist John Claeson master, and of her tackle
and furniture, and of all or the most part of the cargo of goods aboard her at the time of her
surprizall
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.524r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

soe to be And gee further saith there was likewise a parcell of liquorish
amounting to 44 rivons (as hee guesseth) laden aboard by the sayd
ffactor and saith that all the sayd goods were to be transported into
the downes or dover Roade in the sayd shipp where the sayd Master (as
hee affirmed to this deponet) was to receive order from his sayd
owners for the delivery thereof The premisses hee deposeth and
knoweth being one of the Company of the sayd shipp Saint John Baptist
ad onboard her and seeing the sayd delivery of the sayd outward Cargo
of wheate at Bayon and the ladeing of the sayd goods soe taken in
there

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.525r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 20th of Aprill 1654.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation

4.

Elizaeus Spillibout of London aged 34 yeares or thereabouts
Booke-keeper of the producent Arnold Beake
Marchant, sworne and examined

To the first and second articles of the said allegation hee saith that it appeareth
by the bvookes of entrie of the said Arnold Beake fairely kept and
written Merchant-wise that in the moneth of September
last nameky on the 29th of the same moneth, the said Arnold
Beake
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.525v Annotate
Beake bought of the officers of this Commonwealth the shipps then
called the Golden Lilly then lying in the port or harbour of
Dover, and the said shipp being afterwards named the Saint John, and the said
Mr Beake selling parts thereof to others, the proprietie thereof
was and remained and still continueth in the said Arnold Beake
and his brother Elias Beake for a halfe part, and Mr John Daleus a wuarter part, Mr [?Michael]
de Haze and Thomas Greene ioyntly a quarter part, and saith
the cost of the said shipp (the first penny) which was paid to
the State for the said shipp and for fitinga nd setting her out was acccording to the said booke 760 li;
And saith that
in and by the said bookes

[ADD DATA]

To the 8th article hee saith that hee this deponent hath [?XXXX]
and bin imployed in merchandizing and booke-keeping for theis [?X]
yeares last and hath made many voyages abroad to many foreign
parts and saith hee is well acquainted with the value
of the commodities aforesaid soe said to be laden at Bayon
and saith that the said one hundred and tenn tonnes of wine
was and is worth 15 li sterling per tonne, and that the [?wine]
was and is worth 15 li sterling per tonne, and that the said
feathers were (one hundred with another) worth [?eight ?pounds]
per hundred, and were in all according to the said letters and accompts
[?XXX]


HCA 13/68 f.526r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The same day.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation.

'5.'

'James Hedgethorne' servant of the said Mr Arnold
Beake, aged 18 yeares or thereabouts sworne and
examined.

[ADD DATA]

having soe
bought her hee tooke other fellowe owners to him, namely
his brother Elias Beake John Dolins of London merchants
and Michaell de Haze of Dover merchant with whom the
arlate Thomas Greene hath a part, which hee knoweth being
servant to the said Mr Beake and acquainted with the said
buying and paying the money therefore, and
saith that the said shipp
for the hull tackle furniture and fitting out and furnishing
with guns, sailes and other rigging and necessaries cost the said
Mr Beake and companie aforesaid 720 pounds sterling or
neerethereabouts, and after the said buying the said shipp being
named the Saint John Baptist, the said owners set er out for
Bayon and constituted John Claeson master of her
and that shee was soe set out with a cagazon of goods (namely
[?caried]) for the said owners accompt; all which hee knoweth
being servant as aforesaid to the said Mr Beake and imployed
by him in his merchandizing affaires, and specifically acquainted
with the premisses, And otherwise cannot depose, saving the
foresaid Arnold and Elias Beake John Dolins, Michaell de
Haze and Thomas Greene have ever since the said buying bin and
are commonly accompted the true and lawfull owners of the
said shipp and of her tackle and furniture.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.527r Annotate
The 26th of Aprill 1654:-

The Clayme of John Johnson of Greenwicg)
and of James Granger for the vessell the ffortune)
whereof John Van den Panhuysen Master and the goods in)
[?XX] Suckley. Smith)

Examined upon an Allegation on the behalfe
of the said Claymers

4

John van den Panhuysen Mariner Master of
the said vessell the ffortune inhabitant and free
Burgher of Dunquirke in fflanders aged 33 . yeares
or thereabouts sworne and examined.

[ADD DATA]

...That about the time predeposed the said John Johnson caused
about twelve thousand lamper eeles to be laden aboard the said vessell at
Greenwich to be transported from thence to Dunquirke, and there to be sold and
disposed of by one Edward Johnson the brother of the allate John Johnson
who went factor or supra Cargo of the said lading for the selling and disposing
of the same to the best advantage and benefit of the said John Johnson. The
premisses hee knoweth being Master of the said shipp the ffortune so constituted
appointed and employed as aforesaid. And further cannot depose.

To the third and 4th articles of the said Allegation hee saith and deposeth, That the
said Vessell the ffortune being under the Conduct of this deponent in her right
Course from Greenwich towards dunquirke met with contrary wind
whereby one of her masts was broken and the vessell forced into the
River of the Maze neare the Brill in Holland and that the aforesaid
Edward Johnson did sell and dispose of the said lading of lamper eeles at
Maesland sluice in Holland and there did buy and provide for the accomptof the said John Johnson his employer six and twentie barrells of Codfish
which hee caused to be laden aboard this deponents said shipp for the said John
Johnson his accompt and upon his adventure to be transported to dunquirke
and there to be sold and disposed of by the said ffactor for the accompt aforesaid
as the said ffactor severall times declared and affirmed to this deponent at and
about the time of the lading of the Codfish aforesaid

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.528r Annotate
U[on a Libell given in
and admitted on the
Plaintiffs behalfe

16th January 1653 in [?XX[ et cetera

1)

'Edward Peirce' of Lymehouse in the County of
Middlesex Mariner aged about 36 yeares where
he hath lived about fourteene yeares last, a
wittnes produced and sworne, and being examined he
deposeth and saith as followeth

[ADD DATA]

under the command of the arlate ffrancis
Hardridge to the Barbados and back againe but who were her Owners and Proprietors
he knoweth not Except one Mr Leigh of London Merchant now
deceased who was an Owner of her as hee this deponent hath heard
the sayd Leigh affoirme, And further he deposeth not.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.529r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The second of ffebruary 1653./

Smith against Langley Master, Elliott)
Thorowgood and Merchant Owners of)
the shipp the John and Mary of London)
for wages Clements Smith)

Examined upon the libell and schedule thereto annexed

'William Creeke' of Wapping in the parish of
Stepney and County of Middlesex Mariner Purser
of the sayd shipp John and Mary aged 32 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined saith
and deposeth as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the libell hee saith and deposeth that during all the
tyme arlate videlicet in the moneth of January ffebruary and March 1651 and
March Aprill ay June July August September October November
December January ffebruary and march 1652 and March Aprill May
June July and August 1653 the arlate Elliott Thorowgood Mordent
and Langley were and are Commonly reputed and Accompted lawfull Owners
of the shipp the John and Mary arlate, and of this deponents knowledge
as owners thereof did in the moneth of January 1651 fitt furnish and set
forth the sayd shipp to sea to sayle on a voyage from the Port of London to Ginney
and from there to the Barbadoes and soe back to London The premisses
hee knoweth being Purser of the sayd shipp during the whole voyage
aforesayd And otherwise saving his subsequent depositions to which
hee referreth hee cannot depose/

To the second article of the sayd libell and to the schedule therein mentioned
hee
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.529v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

hee this deponent being purser of the sayd Shipp did
enter in his books of Accompts what monethly wages was agreed
upon to be paid to every one of the sayd shipps Company and well
remembreth that the sayd Abraham Smith was entered in the
sayd booke at the rate of fower pounds per moneth, but who in particular
hyred the sayd Smith or [?Prince] hee knoweth not hee this deponent not
being present at the contract when they were hyred, but hath seene read
and coppied out a Commission wherein the sayd John Langley was by the
sayd Owners constituted Master or Commander of the sayd shipp, the
sayd Abraham Smith his cheife Mate, and this deponent Purser of her
for the voyage aforesayd And further hee cannot depose/

To the third 4th &amp; 5th articles of the sayd libell hee saith that hee this deponent
was not present at the makeing of any such agreement as is arlate
betweene the arlate John Langley and Abraham Smith but siath hee
this deponent at Gravesend in the moneth of January 1651 before the shipp the John and Mary departed
from thence on her voyage aforesayd heard the sayd Smith demand
of the sayd Langley a noate under his hand for two Negroes whereto
the sayd Langley replyed I pray thee Mate bee content I will give
thee or give thee a noate when I come on board or words to that effect And further hee cannot depose
saving hee saith that when the sayd shipp was come to
Callabarr in Guinney the sayd Smith there againe desyred the sayd Langley
that in respect hee the sayd Langley had not appointed whether the
two Negroes which hee was to allowe him over and above his wages shall
be men Negroes or women Negroes nor where to be delivered that
hee would then give him a noate to conclude where they should be
delivered and what sexe they should bee whereupon the determination
of the sayd matter was by consent of the sayd Langley and Smith referred
to the abitament of this deponent the purser of the sayd shipp
and this deponent by virtue of such reference did then and there aware that
the sayd Langley should at the Barbadoes allowe unto the sayd 
Smith
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.530r Annotate
over and above his wages one able man negro and one able
woman negro or to the price and value of them to be paid to
him the sayd Smith or his Assignes which arbitrament
being put into writing the sayd Langley before this deponent and
Thomas Wright the Chyrurgion of the said shipp did sett his hand
thereto and did agree to performe the same And further hee cannot
depose saving his depositions to the third article of the sayd libell and saving hee saith that the shipp John and Mary did goe forth on the
voyage arlate on the 17 of January 1651 as is predposed and arrived
at Cormantine in Guiney about the 4th day of May next following and
from there came to Callabarr in Ginney and from thence to the Barbadoes arlate in the moneth of december next
following and from thence came safe to London in or about the moneth
of August 1653 And saving hee saith that during the whole voyage aforesayd the
sayd Abraham Smith did serve in the sayd shipp as cheife Mate and soe farr
as this deponent observed or could observe being Purser and aboard during
the whole voyage) did faithfully and honestly performe his dutie as
Masters mate of the sayd shipp and saving hee saith the arlate Prince dyed in
Guinney and in or about the moneth of May 1652 as hee remembreth.

To the 6th article of the sayd libell hee saith and deposeth as is rpredeposed
that the shipp the John and Mary arlate did arrive at the Barbadoes in the
moneth of December 1652 and that shee brought thither in her divers Negroes
And that after the arrival of her the arlate Abraham Smith did
demand of the arlate Langley two Negroes according to the
arbitrament aforesayd or the value of them in goods whereupon hthe sayd
Langley ordered this deponent to pay the sayd Smith for his sayd
two Negroes, and this deponent askeing the sayd Langley what hee should
pay him for them the sayd Langley ordered this deponent to pay the
sayd Smith three thousand pounds of Muscavado Sugar
and this deponent in persuance of the sayd order did at the Barbadoes pay unto the sayd
Smith two thousand eight hundred and seaventy pounds of sugar in part
of payment of the sayd 3000 li in liew of the sayd Negroes And further
cannot depose/

To the 7th hee saith that hee this deponent did at the same tyme arlate at the Barbadoes
sell Negroes for above fifteene hundred pounds of sugar a head
which is above the rate arlate and they were usually then sold there for the rate
arlate or more And further hee cannot depose/

To the 8th hee referreth him selfe to his foregoeing deposition and further
cannot depose

To the 9th hee cannot depose

To the 10th hee referreth him selfe to the Registry of the Court Interrate
and further cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.531v Annotate
The tenth of ffebruary 1653.

On the behalfe of Captaine)
Dare and others touching the)
ffortune)

Captaine Robert Dare of Lyme Regis in
the Countie of Dorsett Merchant aged
thirtie Nyne yeares or thereabouts, and John
Tucker of the same Towne and Countie Mariner
aged 26. yeares or thereabouts sworne before the right
worshipfull William Clerke and John Godolphin
doctors of lawes
Judges of the high Court of the Admiraltie of England
saith and deposeth by vertue of theire Oathes as followeth
videlicet/

ffirst the said Captaine Robert dare deposeth that a certaine dutch
shipp called the Saint Peter whereof Cornelius Simons was
Master beinge taken and surprized at sea by the Shippe the
Suckley ffrigott whereof Richard Growden was Captaine by vertue
of Letters of Marque or Reprizall granted unto Richard Pettugale against
the goods of the States Generall of the United Provinces and their
subjects, and proceeded against, and condemned in the said high Court
of the Admiraltie with the Tackle and Appurtenances, and the goods
Wares and Merchandizes in the same to the said Richard Pettingale of
a shipp and ladeinge belonginge to the Subjects of the said States of
the United Netherlands, as in the sentence given in the
said Court the Eighteenth of August last past, exemplified under
the Seale of the said Court appeareth, Was by Captaine Isaac
Philipps of London English Merchant (imployed  by and interessed
with the said Richard Pettingale in the said Commission and by
whome the said ffrigott the Suckley was by vertue of the said Commission
sett out) in and by his bill of sale (lawfully made and [?prepared])
bearinge date the seaven and Twentieth day of June last July
and absolutly made over and sold, by the name of the Peter of Ams
terdam, of the burthen of two hundred Tunns or thereabouts then
lying at Southampton with her Tackle Apparell and furniture
unto him this deponent, his Executors, Administrators, and Asynes
for a certiane summe of money by him this deponent paid
in and by the said bill of sale under the hand and Seale of the said
Captaine Phillips , bearinge date the said 27th day of June last
[?made]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.532v Annotate
and with the settinge of her out from Lime aforesaid in the said
Voyage by them the said Solomon Andrewes, Walter Tucker
and Captaine Dare all Englishe Merchants livinge at Lime afore=
said, and that hee the better knoweth the premisses, for that hee
was by the said Merchants hired to goe Masters Mate of the said shipp
the said Voyage from Lime to Croisick and returne thence for
Waterford, or Wexford aforesaid, there to discharge for their Ac=
compt

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.533r Annotate
The 11th of ffebruary 1653.

The Claime of John Costey and others
[?contained] in a schedule or specification given in this)
cause on their behalfe for the foods in the Hope)
of Hamborough Marin [SXXX] Master)

Examined upon the allegation given in the
acts of Court on the behalfe of
the said claimers,a nd the schedule
thereto annexed

.j.

Diederick Warnicke of Hamborough servant of Mr
Claus Luce of the same Marchant, aged 25 yeares or
thereabouts sworne and examined

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.534r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

blackish browne haired, and is a merchant. Hendrick Harhtman hee
hath knowne alsoe about tenn yeares, living in Hamborough and saith
hee liveth there neere Saint Catherins church, where hee is a merchant of
a middle stature and black browne haired. David Ott hee hath knowne
about six yeares, during which space hee hath dwelt in Hamborough, where
hee is a merchant and a tall man dwelling in Bonsstreete,
where the foresaid Hance Leman dwelleth with him...

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.535r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 16th hee saith hee this deponent is a hamburgher borne and
hath dwelt there all his time, and is a servant of Claus Luys aforesaid
father of the said Marke Luys and hath soe bin for theise tenn yeares
last or therabouts, and liveth alwaies there saving when hee is sent
in voyages and journeys into Germant, and other places in his said masters
imployment.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 16th of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation and schedules.

2

Claus Vosse of Hamborough aged 23 yeares or thereabouts
servant of Ditcliff Stolley one of the producents sworne and
examined.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.535v Annotate
the said John the producent, and sawe him the said John the same there buy and
provide hatts, belts, hatbands, sword hilts and other goods to be sent to hamborough
to his said facther, and this deponent was with him at severall shopps
and places in Paris and sawe him pay ready money for the same. And to the parcells
of goods under the fifth and 36 markes said to be for the accompt of Christian Balden [?XXX]
of hamburgh, hee saith and deposeth that hee alsoe sawe the said Christian at
Parism and knoweth that hee having bought severall goods there and being upon his
departure thence ffor Roane therewith, hee tooke order with his father at
Paris to cause a greate many belts to be made and sent after him, and
that hee tooke order with his father for payment for the same for his
the said Christians accompt

[ADD DATA]

Roane, namely two tonnes full of hatts and some woollen stockings, gloves
and other woollen ware, and three small bales of beades and prints upon paper
hee bought at Paris, and at Roane two fatts of ghatts, for his said
masters accompt, and to be transported to him to hamborough

[ADD DATA]

HCA 13/68 f.539v Annotate
To the first second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that the
said dogger boat the hurtle belongeth to the part of fflanders in
Holland, and that her owners dwell there and were there borne and
subiects of the States of the United Netherlands, and are by name [XXX]
Johnson Breeck, and John Johnson Breeck; and saith the said dogger
was outwards  bound there for the North Sea on a fishing voyage, and
had only water and salt on her for ballast and to salt their fish [XXX]
be taken, with lines, Caske and other furnishings appertances [XXX]
of her seizure which are alsoe belonging to the said owners, saving [XXX]
lines, which are beling to the shipps company, all of fflanders and
Subiects of the said States, All wchich [Ceek???th] being master of the
boate and aboard her at the time of her seizure, which seizure [XXX]
was made by Captain Mowle off the Texel about a [for???]
upon the high seas, and other wise hee cannot depose.

[mark]
----
The same day

Derrick Johnson of fflarden in Holland Mariner in
the company of the said doggerboate the hurtle
49 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined as aforesaid

To the first second and third Interrogatories hee saith and deposeth that
this doggerboate belongeth to the part of fflarden in Holland [XXX]
her owners Paul Johnson Breeck and John Johnson Breek dwell [XXX]
are subiects of the States of the United Netherlands and are [XXX]
company, and saith she was seized about a fortnight [XXX] by
Mowle at va off the Texel as shee was outwards bound for the
North sea to fish and had salt and finishing materialls aboard
all belonging to [E???d] hollanders, subiects of the said States.

Repeated with his [XXX] before Dr Clerke
and Coll. York

[mark]
----
The tenth day of April 1654

Att’t touching the )
Hides claimed by Mr Bourne )
for a Spaniard in the Salvador )
R.

Christian Cloppenbergh of Hamburgh [Ma???]
Master and Commander of the shipp the Salvadore
of Hamburgh now lying in this River of [?Thames]
aged Two and forty yeares or thereabouts
Sworne before the right worshipfull William Clerke
&amp; John Gadolphin doctors of Law and
Judges of the High Court of Admiralty and
examined saith and deposeth by virtue of his Oath
as followeth videlicet

That he this deponent did att Cadiz in Spaine this last [p???]
he made thither about the latter end of the Summer 1652
receyve on board his sayd shipp the Salvador then [XXX]


HCA 13/68 f.540r Annotate
in the bay neer to Cadiz three severall parcells of hides under several [XXX] and
noe more and that one of the sayd parcells did conteyne fifteene
hundred hides and noe more and another of the sayd parcells did
conteyne one hundred and seven hides and no more and that
and saith that [XXX] and [XXX] more or  [XXX] [???lds]
aboard at the time of the seizure but the said
three parcells./

[signed:] Christian Cloppenbergh
----
The 17th of April 1654

[XXX] and company against Saint John)
and goods in [th????] )

Examined upon the said allegation in the articles
on the behalf of the said mola and company.

'Michael Le Deane' of Morlais in Bretagne Mariner
aged 21 yeeres or thereabout Sworne and examined.

To the said allegation he saith that about sevene monethes since or
upwards he this deponent (being one of the company of the shipp the
Peter of fflushing (Jean Sous Captaine) a man of war, which with
another man of war named the Margaret of dunquirk were
used and imployed to convoy shipps betwixt fflushing and dunquirke)
saw the shipp the Saint John Baptist (Jacob selkiner) at [C???]
a vessel of about an hundred tonnes burthen and having six
peeces of Canon or artillery, which the [???] of Saint John'
Baptist [p???ed] in her sterne, and a red lyon carved on her beak head
and saith that the said shipp the St John which was said to have come
from [XXX] to fflushing and to be thenne bound for
Spaine and then the master desiring to goe with her to
dunquirke, darest not goe with noe convoy through feare
of the English, and soe hee saith that shee was with 14 or 15
other vessells convoy from fflushing to dunquirke by his said
two men of warr, and in their passage to dunquirk
the said master of the St John came aboard the said man of warr
the Peter wherein this deponent was, to speake with the
Captaine thereof, and when hee went off againe his [XXX]
boate wherein he came being retrieved aboard, the said
Captaine sent his baote to carry him aboard, in which boate
this deponent went and helped to [XXX] the said master of the
St John aboard his said shipp, and heard him say that hee
would goe from [?Wardike] for Spaine, and this deponent heard
some of his company at [?Cashing] say that [XXX] came from Amsterdam
and saith that on Tuesday last this deponent saw the said master
Jacob selke upon the Exchange London, and well knewe him
againe to be the same master of the Saint John that was soe
convoyed from fflushing to dunquirk hee [XXX] being [XXX] a tall bigg
man of whitish complexion and having a [???ish] beard, and this deponent
hath heard and bin told that hee the said master and his said shipp were
taken and brought into England and the said shipp under question for prize
and otherwise hee cannot deposeth.

To the Interrogatorie [XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.541r Annotate
To the 15 hee saith hee is a poore mariner that seketh his fortune and
imployment from place to place without fixed habitation

To the 16 negatively.

To the 17 negatively.

To the Interroogatories in the second place.

To the said interrogatorie negatively.

The marke of the said
[MARKE] Michaell le deane [MARKE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctors Clarke and Godolphin
----
The 19th of Aprill 1654.

Examined upon the foresaid allegation in the acts

5

Nicholas Pine of Cadiz in Spaine, merchant, aged 36
yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined.

To the said allegation hee saith and deposeth that hee knoweth the allegate
Mr Stoffels and Peter Gerridge, and saith they were and are commonly
accompted the owners of the shipp the Saint John allegate, whereof
hee saith Jacob holkes (whom hee saith hee likewise knoweth) is master,
and this deponent hath heard them at Amsterdam (where they the said
Stoffels and Gerridge dwell) say that they were the owners thereof.
And further that this deponent comming from Cadiz to Amsterdam
had recommendations from a freind of this deponents at Cadiz
named John de Wint a ffleming, to the said Gerridge at Amsterdam
to whom this deponent had a letter from the said de Wint, and saith
that this deponent ariving at Amsterdam in June last, delivered
the said letter to the said Gerridge, and this deponent staying in Amsterdam
from that time till about the end of September last had much conversation
with the said Gerridge by meanes of the said recommendation and had
assistance from him in this deponents merchandizing affaires, And
by soe conversing with the said Gerridge, hee became acquainted with
the said Stoffells, who in that space frequented the house and company
of the said Gerridge, they two having parnershipp and dealing with
each other. And saith that hee heard the said two merchants of
Amsterdam Stoffels and Gerridge severall times speake of lading
and sending a shipp for Malaga with corne, and that before
her lading, they went aboard her to be merry and tooke this deponent
with them, and then this deponent sawe the picture of Saint John in
her sterne, and heard that her name was the Saint John, and
that her masters name was Jacob Holkes, and this
hee saith was in the moneth of August last, the said shipp then 
lying in the haven of Amsterdam; And further that about three
weekes ince hee this deponent being at Dover (where hee then arived),
and beholding the shipps that then lay there
in harbour, hee sawe the said shipp the Saint John there
which hee had soe seene and bin aboard of at Amsterdam, and
well knewe her againe by her bulke and fashion, and by the said
picture in her sterne, and there hee understood that shee was brought
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.541v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the first hee saith hee ws borne at Cadiz in Spaine, where
hee alwaies lived till the moneth of December 1650 at which time
hee departed thence for the West Indies and in going and coming and
staying there hee spent about 7 or 8 monethes, and upon his returning
to Cadiz hee staied there 13 or 14 monethes, and then went to
fflanders, and after about 8 dayes stay at Ostend
went to Amsterdam, which his arivall at Amsterdam was about
a moneth after his departure from Cadiz for fflanders
[?XXXXX] the moneth last June last, and his
stay there was about three monethes or more, and thence hee
went to Dunquirke and staid there 7 or 8 dayes, and thence hee
went to Cadiz and staid there a fortnight, and thence went
by land to Malaga where hee arived on or about the eighth of November
and staid there till the 22th of December of thereabouts, and
retourned by land to Cadiz, where
staying about 6 weeke, hee imbarqued himselfe for Dunquirke
where hee staid about a fortnight, and then imbarqued 
himselfe for Dover where hee arived three dayes after Easter
last newe stile, and after 3 or 4 dayes stay there hee came to London
where hee hath bin ever since.

To the second hee saith hee is a subiect of the Kinge of Spaine
and otherwise hee hath specified above.

To the third hee saith that the time hee staid in Amsterdam as
aforesaid hee laye at the signe of North Holland neere the [?XXX]
Bridge, the name of the host being Peter Thomas, and
otherwise saving as aforesaid hee cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.544r Annotate
B. 2.

The fifth day of January 1653.

The Lord Protector of the Commonwealth)
of England, Scotland and Ireland)
against the shipp the Magdalen of
Ostend and goods in the same and
against Peter Thson and Company)
comeing in for their Interest therein)
Budd Smith.)

Examined upon an allegation on behalf
of the sayd Peter Thyson and Company

ffrancis Martyn of Ostend in fflanders
Mariner quartermaster of the sayd shipp
the Magdalen aged 62 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposed and
saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To the second article he saith the arlate Peter Thyson whom this deponent
hath knowne eight teares and upwards was and is an Ostender and
a subiect of the King of Spaine and for and as such commonly
accomted reputed and taken and otherwise cannot depose.

he was commisionated so to do by the Archduke Leopoldus Governor of
fflanders under the sayd King of Spaine by a Commission of marque
and that he the sayd Thyson in the monethes foresayd did take upon him
to execute and did really execute the saud Commission against and upon
the subiects of the sayd ffrench King, all which he eknoweth for that
he was quarter master of the sayd shippSaint John within the sayd tyme
and privy to and employed actually in the foresayd designe. And
otherwise he cannot depose

[ADD DATA]

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That the sayd
Peter Thyson by vertue of the sayd Commission of marke upon the high
and open seas upon or about the 6th day of December newstile 1653
did surprize and take the arlate shipp the Magdalen of Rochell
laden with salt sope brandewyne and some other goods all belonging
and apperteyning to ffrencg men subiects of the ffrench King as the
Skipper and shipps Company of the Magdalene being all ffrench
men and of Rochell did declare and Confesse. And further that the sayd shipp being
so taken the sayd Captaine Thyson did putt into her nyne of his owne
men to witt this deponent as principall and eight more, and tooke
the master and three moire the Magdalens Company on board his
man of warr and left onley three men of the Magdalens
Company on board her in the nature of prisoners under the power
and in the possession of this deponent and his sayd 8 men
to
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.544v Annotate
to be carryed to Ostend

[ADD DATA]

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation he saith that this deponent and his
eight Consorts were and remained in the quiet and peaceable possession
of the sayd shipp the Magdalen and her lading by the space of four
dayes and nights, and were carrying the sayd shipp and lading to
Ostend to be  adiudged as aforesayd, And that the sayd shipp and lading
in their Course thither after they had bene so possessed as aforesayd
by the space of four dayes by this deponent and sayd 8 consorts all
Ostenders were mett with surprized and taken by the arlate shipp
the Welcome whereof the sayd Thomas Bonnet is Captaine, and
brought into Portsmouth and there deteyned. And that att the tyme
of the sayd seizure he this deponent and sayd eight men formerly
as aforesayd belonging to the shipp Saint John of Ostend remained in the
possession of the sayd shipp Magdalen and her lading, Of
all which this deponent was an eye witnesse and knoweth the same to
be true. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that immediately
upon the seizure of surprizall aforesayd hee this deponent did give
the sayd Order or note of Captaine Thyson to the sayd Captaine Bonnet

[ADD DATA]

To the seaventh article


HCA 13/68 f.545r Annotate
by the Saint John of Ostend

[ADD DATA]

To the eighth article

[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1 he saith he was aboard the Magdalen

[ADD DATA]

To the second Interrogatory

[ADD DATA]

To the third Interrogatory

[ADD DATA]

To the fourth he saith he never heard nor beleeveth that the sayd Tyson had
ever any Commission from any but the King of Spaine

[ADD DATA]

To the fifth he saith

[ADD DATA]

To the sixth Interrogatory

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.545v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The sixth day of January 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

20

Peter Michelson of Saint Sebastians in Spayne one
of the Mariners belonging to the shipp Magdalen
aged thirty yeares or thereabouts a witnesse sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.546r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

this deponent who was present att and assisting in the taking
of the sayd prize and his precontest ffrancis Martin as quarter master
to command her and carry the sayd three french Mariners in her as
prisoners, and conduct the shipp Magdalen and her lading to Pot
to be condemned

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.546v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The tenth day of Janaury 1653

The Lord Protector against the shipp)
Lovisa.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Row dt.

2)

Thomas Harreson of Lewis in the County
of Sussex late Clarke of the Checque aboard the

Kentish ffrigot aged 34 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the Captaine and Company of the Kentish frigot being on
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.547v Annotate
The eleventh day of January 1653

Thomas brooke Jonas Cruse and)
against James Cade)

Examined on the sayd allegation

2)

Peter Joy of Blackfryers London late
Chirurgeons mate of the shipp James a private man of warr in the
service of this Commonwealth aged 18 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

Stephen Cruse a Reformado in the sayd
shipp

[ADD DATA]

Saint Augustine and the other Abrahams Offering

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.548r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The thirteenth day of January 1653

On behalfe of his Highnes)
the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth)
of England, Scotland and Ireland)
and dominions thereto belonging)
against the shipp the Stat Meklenburgh)
whereof Hendrick Mecklenbergh)
is master. Budd)

Examined upon Interrogatories on
behalfe of the Lord Prot'ector

'hendrick Meklenbergh' of Embden
Mariner Master of the said shipp the
Stadt of Meklenbergh aged 56 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To the first Interrogatory he saith the Owners of the sayd shipp
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.548v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the second Interrogatory he saith that he this deponent on the behalfe of
himselfe and the rest of his sayd Owners did about three yeares or so
buy the sayd shipp att Amsterdam of Ania Robbert a ffreizlander
who made this deponent a bill of sale for the same in consideration
of 3770 gilders first penny which moneyes this deponent with his owne
hand payd for the sayd shipp to the sayd Robbert. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

tooke first Charge
att Amsterdam and the master next before him was the sayd Robbert
and the same persons are Owners that were 12 monethes since
videlicet the foresayd persons Inhabitants of Embden who constituted
this deponent master of the sayd shipp. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 4th Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp begann her outward voyage
from Embden and came last from Nantes, and from there
was bound home to the sayd Port of Embden and othewise negatively

[ADD DATA]

And this deponent hath a board for his owne reckoning
4 peices of brandewine .5. fatts of wyne. tenn fatts of
wallnutts which nutts cost frst penny 1300 guilders. and the
shipps Company have aboard for their account about 7 or
8 hogsheads of wine in quantity
putt upp in small fatts. and about a hogshead or two in
quantity of brandewine putt up in small fatts, all
which were laden att Nantes and consigned to Embden

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.549v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 17th and 18th he saith the sayd shipp on or about the 19th day of december
last past old stile upon her Course to Embden mett with a violent
storme upon the English Coast and by stresse of weather and it
being night was driven neere the shoare and in the morning
this deponent found the sayd shipp to be in Monkes bay, and her
thereupon cast anchor, att five fadom water, having lost his
anchors before att sea, and further that a ffisher boat comeing
that way this deponent and shipps Company being in danger of
pershing made shift and did save themselves i the sayd
ffisher boat and gott all safe to land, and that they left behind
them in their sayd shipp two live Cockes. and that about three howers
after the storme being well over and the wind standing right
this deponent for 20 Ryx dollars hired the sayd fisherboat  to carry
himselfe and Company a shipboard againe

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.550r Annotate
The 17th day of January 1653.

The Lord Protector)
against the Looesa)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3)

Richard Moore of Wapping in the County of Middlesex
Mariner masters mate of the Kentish frigot
aged 45 yeares or therabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.550v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 19th day of January 1653

A Busines of Examination of witnesses)
on the part and behalfe of Richard)
Bromewell and Company Owners of the)
shipp the Mary Bonadventure of London)
whereof the sayd Richard Bromewell was)
Master being Owners and Laders of the)
sayd shipp or a great part thereof which)
shipp and ladeing was seized by the King)
of Denmarke or his Mnisters within)
that Kiongdome. Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of the
sayd Richard Bromwell and Company

Clements dt.

1

Zachary Bromewell of Greenwich in the County
of Kent Mariner masters mate of the sayd
shipp the Mary Bonadventure aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.551r Annotate
still ought to be the lawfull Owners of a good part of the lading
of the sayd shipp hereafter specifyed, which he knoweth being Masters
Mate of the sayd shipp the voyage in question, and for the reasons
hereafter sett forth And otherwise he cannot depose, saving
that the sayd Richard Bromewell was Captaine or Commander of the
sayd shipp and so accounted.

To the second article he saith the sayd whipp was by the sayd Owners
ymployed on a voyage from this port about the Month of April
1652 under Conduct of the sayd Richard Bromewell to sayle into the
Balticksea and from thence to returne with a lading of goods
usually exported from those parts to this Port of London which
he knoweth for the reason aforesayd and otherwise cannot depose
saving that the sayd shipp made her first port being Dantzick
about the moneth of May 1652 . and from thence sayled to
Quinsborough in June following, and returned homewards, taking
Copenhagen in her way about August in the same yeare.

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that after the
Arrivall of the sayd shipp Mary Bonadventure att Quinsbrough
and in the moneths of June and July aforesay 1652 the sayd
Richard Bromewell of the certaine knowledge and sight of this
deponent did buy all and singular the goods hereafter specifyed
with ready money for accompt of himselfe and Common Owners, and
afterwards in the sayd monethes of this deponents like sight and
knowledge did lade the same for the same Accompt aboard the
sayd shipp then leying neere Wuinsborough, the kinds quantityes
and values of which goods were and are as followeth to say
12 bundles of Rhine hemp being 181 hundred weight at 34 shillings per hundred is
307 li 14 s and 121 small bundles of like hempe being 49 1/4 hundred
att 26 s per hundred is 64 li and 50 pieces of Pouldavis att 20 s per
peice is 50 li and 6 hundred of Clapboards att 6 li per hundred is
36 li and 100 of great Clapboards worth 10 li and 48 shock
of yarne att 14 s the shock is thirty three pounds and one hundred shock of yarne att 16 s per shock is 80 li and 100 pieces of flaxen
linnen Cloth being 30 shock 27 ells att 55 s per shock is
33 li 15 s and 65 peices of hedding linnen being 19 shock
10 ells, att 32 s 6 d per shock is 31 li and 50 bundles of flaxe
being 16 hundred weight att 55 s per hundred is 44 li and 30 deales att 10 s
per deale is 15 li and three sackes of feathers being 133 pound
att 12 d per pound is 6 li 13 s and one Coyle of white Rope
being 2 3/4 hundred at 40 s per hundred and severall other
things as Sturgeon, platters and Cases of bottles worth 12 li
all to be in the sayd shipp transported to this port of London for
the Accompt aforesayd. And saith that the Mariners of the
sayd shipp being in all 31 persons besides the master had an
Adventure aboard the sayd shipp for their owne Accompt in
hempe and flax and other things which with their Clothes
and necessaries were of the Cleare value of 450 li sterling
which were to hae bene brought to London for like accompt
and that the sayd Richard Bromwell had likewise aboard the
sayd
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.551v Annotate
sayd shipp as belonging onely to himselfe Cloathes Instruments
and other necessaries to the value of 20 li. All which sayd goods
and merchandizes by the seizure hereafter sett forth were and
are utterly lost to the sayd Browmell and his Owners, and the
sayd Browmwell and shipps Company according to their
respective shares therein. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd
shipp the Mary Bonadventure was an able strong stanch
and well built shipp, and that she was of or about the burthen
of 340 tonnes with 16 gunnes or pieces of ordinance and that
with her sayd gunnes tackle apparell and furniture she was
well worth in the Judgement of this deponent the summe of 2400 li
sterling and somuch she would have yeilded to have bene sold
And otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by
reason of the premisses and the seizure of the sayd shipp the
foresayd Richard Bromwell and his Owners over and above
the losse of their sayd shipp and goods as aforesayd amounting
to 3165 li 12 s sterling have suffered other dammages to greate
value. videliet for fraight of the sayd shipp the voyage in
question. 500 li sterling and for 15 monethes ymployment 
of the sayd shipp at 100 li per moneth 1500 li sterling and in
13 mens wages and victualls for 9 monethes after the
foresayd detention at 40 li per moneth is 360. over and
besides the losse of the use of the sayd moneyes or losse of improvement
of the sayd stock. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Zacharias Bromwell Junior [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day Examined uponthe sayd allegation

2

Salter Waters of IpswichMariner late Carpenter
aboard the sayd shipp aged 42 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.552v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 6th article he saith that the sayd Richard Bromwell and
Company over and above the losses aforesayd have by meanes
of the sayd seizure suffered the losse of 600 li sterling for the
freight of the merchants goods aboard he sayd shipp the
voyage in question, and severall other losses and dammage
which this deponent cannot certainly specify or declare
And otherwise hee cannot depose,saving that the sayd 
shipp was really worth 100 li sterling per moneth to be lett
and that 13 men of the sayd shipp continmued in Denmarke without imployment
att the Charge of the sayd Owners for 9 monthes to the dammage
or value of about 40 li per moneth.

Salter 'WW' Walters
his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]
----
The 20th day of January 1653.

The Clayme of Jaques Martin of)
Hamburgh for the goods lately)
seized in the ffortune of Stralsund)
of which Cornelius Janson is Master)
by the Elias of which John Best)
was Commander Suckly Budd)

Cornelius Janson of Stralsund
under the Dominions of the Queene of
Swethland Mariner Master of the sayd
shipp the ffortune aged 40 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposth an saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the .1. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in the
moneth of September last past 1653 the arlate shipp the ffortune
unde rthe Conduct of this deponent arrived at the Port of
Hamburgh from Riga, and saith that after the same had
layne about three weekes in the River of Elve the arlate
Jaques
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.553r Annotate
Jaques Martyn of Hamburgh did take he sayd shipp the ffortune
to ffreight upon the sayd River and att the sayd Port of Hamburgh
to goe from thence to Nantes in ffrance there to take in a lading
of wyne brandewyne Pruens and such other goods as the Assignee
of the sayd Jaques Martin should please to lade aboard the same
and to return with the same to the sayd Jaques Martin to Hamburgh.
And he the sayd Jaques Martin did by his Contract and Agreement
undertake that his Assignes should lade the sayd vessell the ffortune
within sixteene dayes after his arrivall att Nantes. And saith that
the sayd Agreeement was drawne upp betweene the sayd Jaques
Martin and this deponent in a writing of Charterparty att Hamburgh before the sayd shipp departed from thence which sayd
Charter party he saith was taken on board the sayd vessell and is
since brought into the Registry of this Court. And the same Charte rparty
so taken brought into and abidinge in the sayd Court was and is the
originall Contract and Agreement

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.553v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

RTo the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
Jaques Martin of Hamburgh is a merchant of good quality
and great repute and drives a great trade to ffrance
in merchandizes of all sorts, And is commonly reputed to be
an able man and on that trades for his owne Accompt and
Adventure. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposition is true

To the Crosse Interrogatoryes.

Row dt.

To the .1. he saith he was borne at Nisdorp a small village about
2 miles from Stralsond under the Jurisdiction of the Emperour of
Germany, and is an Inhabitant of Stralsond and so hath
bene 13 yeares having a wife and 6. Children there, and is
a subiect of the Queene of Swethland

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.554r Annotate
of Hamburgh 40 yeares and upwards, and this deponent knoweth
not what countryman hee is, but hath heard he was borne att Antwerpe
And did not knowe that the sayd Gorrson was factor of the sayd Martin before
this voyage. And is well assured the sayd Paul Garson is the factor
of the sayd Jaques Martin, and not the sayd Martin of him the sayd
Garson aswell by discourse with the sayd parties themselves, and
report of others, as for that the sayd Jaques Martin is a great
Imployer of shipps and a greate trade to ffrance and hath a
great stock by report in the hands of the sayd Garson. and for that he
this deponent hath receyved 250 dollars of the sayd Garson upon and
for the Accompt and by the order of the sayd Martin to whom this Rendent paid or delivered the like summ before he came from Hamburgh and knoweth
not nor hath heard if the sayd Martin and Garson are partners in
trade. and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third Interrogatorrie he saith by vertue of his Oath that the sayd Jaques
Martin did before the sayd shipp came from Hamburgh name to
this deponent the party who was his Assignee of ffactor in ffrance
that was to lade the sayd shipp, and did then name him by the name
of Garson and not by the name of Drolland.

To the fourth Interrogatory he saith that the Barkiers who brought the
sayd wynes and goods aboard did commonly in speaking of the
sayd Paul Garson call him and speake of hhim by the name of
drollion or drolland, but what the said name doth signify or import
in any language he saith for his part he knoweth not.

To the fifth he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and otherwise negatively.

Cornellis [?Janssy [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor Godolphin
and Doctor Clerke./
----
The 23th day of January 1653.

The Clayme of Dirick de Dobler of Hamburgh)
John Jacobson Carpfanger of Hamburgh
Jan Vanderweyden of Hamburgh and John)
[?deekins] of Hamburgh for the wynes and other)
[?goods] lately seized in the shipp the Justice)
of Stockholme of which Michael Heytman)
is master by the Bristoll frigat in the service)
of this Commonwealth. Suckly Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymners

Michael Heytman of
Stockholme in Swethland master
of the sayd shipp the Justice aged
53 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

pd

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth
of November 1653 last past this deponent being att Nantes in
ffrenace with his sayd shipp the Justice of Stockholm, a young man
by name derick dobler the sonn of the sayd Dirrick da dobler of Hamburgh
and one Gerard Peters, did then and there hire and take the sayd vessell
to ffreight to carry wynes Brandewynes pruens and other goods
from Nantes in ffrance to Hamburgh for accompt of dirrick dobler
and others merchants of Hamburgh. And saith that upon his former
examination taken touching the sayd shipp and lading att ffalmouth
a
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.555r Annotate
deponent did accept of the sayd meane freight in consideration that they
the sayd ffraighters should lade none but free goods in respect of this
Commonwealth, And the sayd  ffraighters did att the tyme of
making the sayd Agreement promise that they would not lade any goods
aboard for accompt of any by Hamburghers onely, and att the lading
of the sayd goods now in question did declare that they were all free
goods and belonging to merchants of Hamburgh and that the others
had any part or share therein. And the sayd dirick dobler in discourse
with this deponent touching the premisses did assure this deponent
with much asseveration that the sayd goods were all free and for
Hamburgh and merchants there living onely or to that purpose but that 
he should declare to this deponent that his father gave him charge
to the effect arlate this deponent remembreth not. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the goods now in question
were brought on board under e severall markes whereupon this deponent
questioning the sayd ffraighters touching the sayd markes, they did expressly
declare that the same were all for the accompt of Hamburgh merchants
and that this deponent was to signe severall bills of lading for the
sayd respective 4 parcells all for Hamburgh and this deponent did
accordingly signed bills of lading for the same that is to say three
bills of lading for each sayd severall parcell all of the same tenor
of the four bills of lading which were on board the sayd shipp
and (sic) the tyme of seizure and the same were and are reall and
true and were signed by this deponents owne hand before the sayd
shipp came from Nantes without any fraud or covin, And this deponent
did not signe any other bills of lading of any other kind. And
otherwise he cannot depose

To the 5th article he saith that the arlate John Jacobson Carpfanger
Abraham Vanderweeden and John deekins are by repute all
merchants of Hamburgh that use a trade to ffrance And the sayd
widdow Wessells that deales much as  aforesayd for Hamburghers
did by her partner or Assistant Gerard Peters aforesayd lade some
quantityes of goods aboard the sayd shipp now in question for accompt
of [?XXX] the sayd Carpfanger weedon and deekins, but whether they
had any effects in the hands of the sayd Wessells and Peter this
deponent knoweth not. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

Row dt

To the .1. he saith the sayd shipp Justice was never att Hamburgh so
far as this deponent knoweth. And that he this Rendent doth not know the
persons of dirrick dobler the father John Jacobson Carpfanger, the
sayd Vander Weeden, deekins nor any of them,. And further saving
as aforesayd otherwise then negatively he cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith the sayd shipp is of the burthen of fifty lasts or
thereabouts. and that there is .46 lasts of goods aboard for the
acoompt of the sayd merchants all which are mentioned in the sayd
bills of lading. And saith there is moreover aboard the sayd
shipp
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.555v Annotate
shipp for accompt of this deponent two pipes of wine and [?thXX]
hogsheads of wyne. and four pipes of prunes. and for accompt [of]
the shipps Companie being 7 mariners one pipe and ten
hogsheads of wyne. And otherwise cannot depose saving that [the]
sayd shipp is so fully laden that large vessells of wine or other goods
cannot conveniently be stowed therein yet small parcells of
goods might be stowed.

To the third he saith he never was att Nantes before this voyage
not ever knew the sayd Widdow Wessells of Gerard Peters
before the sayd voyage And otherwise then as aforesayd cannot depose

To the fourth he saith that he this Rendent did not receyve any
part of his freight in ffrance. but is to receyve it all att [?Hamburgh]
upon delivery of the sayd merchants goods there of and from the
respective merchants interested therein according to the sayd
bills of lading and their respective proportions of goods [?ldaed]
for their accompt as aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose

Repeated before doctors Clerke and Godolphin.

[?XXXX] [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 24th day of January 1653

A Busines of Examination of witnesses)
concerning the shipp the Saint John of)
London of which Mathew Merrill)
is Master promoted by the sayd Merill)
against all that pretend title or)
Interest in the lading of the sayd shipp)
Suckly)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe of
the sayd Merill

Whaley dt.

1.

Robert Mariot of Ipswich Mariner masters
mate of the sayd shipp aged 41 yeares sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the 1. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth[?es]
of October November and december last past 1653. the sayd [?shipp]
the Saint John of which the sayd Matthew Marrell is Master was [?on]
a merchants voyage att Portugall and was in all the moneth[?es]
aforesayd and for severall monethes before a very firme [?staunch]
and tight ship and fitt to carry merchants goods, and so [?much]
was generally observed and knowne to be which this deponent
knoweth to be true being Masters mate of the sayd shipp for
all the sayd tyme. And otherwise hee cannot depose./

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in [?or]
about the 4th day of december last 1653. the said shipp did
sayle from Porto port in Portugall for this Port of London
and comeing over the barr the sea did run so very high
that when the shipp came downe agayne she did strike [?three]
tymes upon the ground and thereby did receyve much dammage
and became very leaky of the certaine knowledge and
sight of him this deponent who was then on board her And
otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd [?shipp]
in her Course for London did upon the sixth day of december [?XX]
meet with a strong gale of wind. and upon the 18 and 19 dayes [?of]
the sayd moneth with a violent storme and tempest [?XX]
that by reason of the sayd violence the shipps boat was staved and
the deckes of the sayd shipp covered with waves, and the [?XX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.556r Annotate
beat off from their worke so as they were not able to stand to the purpose
And saith that in Case any dammage be happened to any of the
goods on board the sayd shipp (as is very probable there is) in her passage
this voyage from Porto Port aforesayd the same did so happen by reason
of the foresayd stormy and tempestuous weather and by reason of
the shipps beating upon the ground att Porto Port as aforesayd
and not by default or insufficency of the sayd shipp or neglect
or fault of the Master or Mariners, all which this deponent
knoweth being aboard all the sayd voyage and an eyewitnes of the
premisses. And otherwise he cannot depose.

Robart Marriott [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

John Baretson of Wapping near London
Mariner Masters mate of the sayd shipp aged
41. yeares sworne and examined saith videlicet.

Whaley dt.

To the 1. 2 and 3. articles of the sayd allegation he saith that the sayd shipp
in October and November last past and for severall monethes before
was a strong tight and [?XXX] shipp fitt for merchants use

lading of goods for Porto Port

John [MARKE] Baretson
his marke
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Whaley dt

3

William Badison of Ipswich Mariner Gunner of the
sayd shipp aged 29 yeares sworne and examined
saith upon his Oath

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.556v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The Lord Protector of England Scotland)
and Ireland against the sylver in the)
shipp called the Patriarke Jacob)
whereof Claes Colebrandt is Master)
and against Anthonio da Labistrat)
and others comeing in for their)
Interest. Budd ffrancklyn)

1

Hans Meynerson of Hamburgh
Captaine and Commannder of the shipp the
Crowne Imperiall of Hamburgh aged
43 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the first article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the arlate
Antonio de Labistraet, Hanits Garts the younger, ffrancis Sloyer
Daniel Brands, Jeronimo Snitquar. Adrian Youncker Joachim
Van Campen the son of Paridin [alt. reading is &quot;Paridon&quot;], Albert Anquelman Peter [?and]
Arnold Rulands ffrancis Wallich and John Baptista Youncker
severally and respectively named in the bill of lading and
schedule formerly exhibited in their cause and now read over to
this deponent, are persons all well knowne to this deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.557r Annotate
so have bene many yeares. And saith that the foresayd persons all
and every of them of the certaine knowledge of this deponent in the
monethes of May June July August September and October
arlate of this presente yeares 1653 now currant, and att the tyme
of the lading of the sylver now in question and for many moneths
before and many of them for many yeares before have driven
and doe drive a fair and present trade from Hamburg to Cadiz
in Spaine for sylver, and thither have and doe usually send peice
goods of great value to be returned in sylver and have had and
have their respective factors att Cadiz and Sevilia of their owne kinred and
alliance to receyve such goods and make such returnes and to
mannage the sayd trade, for them, and that some of the sayd persons have
formerly lived in Spaine about Saint Lucar and Cadiz in their youth
mannaging the like factories for their Ancestors and freinds merchants
of Hamburgh and particularly the sayd daniel Brands, Jeronimo
Snitgar and ffrancis Wallich. all which this deponent knoweth aswell
by the constant and continued fame and repute att Hamburgh
(where this deponent hath lived all his tyme) touching such trade of
the sayd merchants the persons above named and by frequent discovert
and conversation with them upon occasion of such trade, and allso
of their factors residing att Cadiz being Hamburghers and
kinsmen of the foresayd persons all likewise well knowne to this deponent
as for that he this deponent hath himselfe carryed goods from
the foresayd persons merchants of Hamburgh from Hamburgh to
Cadiz, and there delivered the same to the barkiers of their respective factors, and
hath receyved returnes of sylver consigned to
most of the persons merchants of Hamburgh as is hereafter mmore particularly
sett forth. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second and third Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that the sayd Antonio de Labistrat and other the the persons above particularly
mentioned of the sight and observation of this deponent did send
severally from Hamburgh severall parcells of peice goods of
great value consigned for Cadiz in Spaine severall monethes
before the sylve in question was laden, videlicet before October last
past 1652, when this deponents shipp and the Patriarke Jacob lay
in the bay of Cadis and particularly a shipp or flute of Hamburgh
whereof Peter Nove was Master which goods in their Course for Cadiz
were seized by the ffrench and departed from Hamburgh with the sayd goods
so consigned in May last, and likewise on board the ffortune of
Hamburgh Berent Carpfanger Master which departed from Hamburgh
likewise in May last and arrived and delivered her goods safely
att Cadiz for accompt of the sayd persons interessed in this cause and
this deponent saw the sayd shipp ffortune depart for Cadiz towards
Hamburgh in September last past; And moreover that in the
moneth of July last past 1653. now Currant the foresayd Antonio da
Labistraet ffrancis Sloyer, Hans [?Garts], daniel Brands, Hieronimo
Snitgar Adrian Youncker Joachim Van Campen Albert Ankelman
the foresayd Rolands, Wallich and John Baptista Youncker did att Hamburgh
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.557v Annotate
Hamburgh cause to be laden on board this deponents sayd shipp the
Crowne Imperiall then lying att the Port of Hamburgh [?some]
peice goods wares and merchandizes to a great value for their
owne severall accompts to be for their accompts and risko transported
to Cadiz and there delivered to their factors for [?the ?accompt]
of them the sayd Laders and the sayd goods safely arrived att Cadiz
in the sayd shipp in the moneth of August last Past 1653, and then
and there this deponent did himselfe saefely deliver the sayd
peice foods wares and merchandizes so sent by the foresayd
Hamburghers interessed in this cause to the servants and barkiers
sent by the merchants or factors att Cadiz (to whom the same were
consigned) to fetch and receyve the same of him this deponent
who afterwards heard the sayd factors respectively acknowledge
that the sayd goods came safe to their hands a shoare att Cadiz
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the
foresayd Anthonio de Labistraet and other the persons above
named interressed in the sayd sylver now in question, and also the
arlate Claes Moller and Claes Colbrandt being the persons
schedulat in October last past and att the tyme of the lading of
the sayd sylver and for twenty yeares before and upwards have bene
were and are all Hamburghers, and every person of them
for all the sayd tyme hath bene and now is an Hamburgher and
citizen burgher and Inhabitant of Hamburgh and a subiect
of and uner the free state thereof. And indeed the sayd persons
were and are Hamnburghers borne and so accounted. And
this deponent knoweth being himselfe a native of Hamburgh
where he hath lived all his tyme and hath knowne well every of the
sayd persons and bene acquainted with them ten yeares and upwards
and some of them 25 yeares and upwards. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 5th article he saith he cannot depose saving that [#]

[#] [TEXT IN LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]
hath many and sundry tymes heard the sayd Claes Colebrandt seriously affirme that in case he had had any suspicion that any part
of the sayd sylver laden on board him had bene unfree as belonging to Hollanders or ffrenchmen he would not have receyved
the same aboard, and that he was assured and told by the respective Laders thereof that the same was all free and for the
sole accompt of the Hamburgh merchants named in the bills of lading for the same; and this deponent beleiveth that
in case the sayd Claes Colbrandt had had any cause to have suspected the sayd sylver to be unfree as to this Commonwealth he would not have
receyved the same for that the Owners of shipps at Hamburgh have since warr betwixt England and Holland given speciall
order to their Skippers not to lade any such nonfree goods in their shipps
hans Meynerson [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. Interrogatory he saith that the sayd shipp Crowne Imperiall
came to Cadiz in August last past and then the Rendent saw
the Patriarke Jacob there lyeing and understood she had bene
there about a month before. and the sayd shipps remayned together
in the bay of Cadiz in the moneth of September and most of
October and sayled from thence together in Company of two other
Hamburgh shipps the Wheele of ffortune and the Saint Paul in
the sayd month of October. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2. Interrogatory he saith the Patriarke Jacob is of the burthen of
about 300 tonnes. and hath about 18 or 20 peices of ordinance
mounted. and the Crowne Imperiall is of the like burthen or not
much lesse and mounted with .16. gunnes and was bound for the
Port of Hamburgh, as were likewise the other shipps that sayled in
her Company.

To the third Interrogatory he saith there were laden aboard the Crowne Imperiall
([?whereof
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.558r Annotate
severall quantities of sylver for accompt of the persons interrate Hants Garts and ffrancis Wallich excepted videlicet
for the sayd ffrancis Sloyer one barr of sylver weighing 142 markes
six ounces and one barr more of 49 markes 6 ounces for the sayd Joachim Van Campen Pardins sonne and one bagg
containing 1000 pieces of 8/8 for the sayd Adriran Yonker two barrs of
sylver weighing together 66 markes 7 ounces and allso 1500 pieces of 8/8
for Albert Anquelman 2000 pieces of 8/8 for Anthonio de Labistrat
4 barrs of sylver worth 390 [?single] Ryalls. for Peter and Arnold
Rulands 486 1/4 pieces of 8/8. for Daniel Brands and Jeronimo
Snitgar ten barretons weighing 171 markes 1 1/2 ounces. for John
Baptista Younker one barr weighing 131 markes. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fourth of the sayd Interrogatories he saith that the sayd Anthonio de
Labistrat sent to Cadiz in this deponents shipp 5 large Chests of buckram
Hans Gardts 2 great fatts of fustians 28 lasts of beanes, and
a large quantity of Barley ffrances Sloyer about 12 fatts and packes
of napkins and linnen Daniel Brandts and Jeronimo Snitguer a
fardell of Cloth of gold and sylver delivered by this Rendent to
delivered to a barke
sent by Mr Snitgars brother Adrian Younker 30 pipes of wax delivered to the
barke of Mr Campen Joachim van Campen severall packes of bale goods
being linnens as he beleiveth, delivered to the barkier of the sayd Mr Campen
Albert Anquelman about 5 or 6 great fatts of goods the sorts whereof
he knoweth not delivered to the barkier of Mr Anquelman the kinsman of Albert Peter and Arnold
Rulands severall great bundles and quantities of wire delivered
to the barkier of their factor whose name he remembreth not And ffrances Wallich and John
Baptista younger severall packes and fatts of peice goods and Muscovia hides
the particulars whereof he knoweth not delivered to barkiers
sent by thei factors Hamburghers whose names att present he remembreth
not, and the goods of the sayd Labistrat and Sloyer were delivered to barkiers
sent by Mr Sloyer of Cadiz the brother of the sayd ffrancis Sloyer.

And otherwise or more particularly wanting the Roll of his
outward lading to assist his memory and not knowing the
value of the sayd goods he saith he cannot depose, saveing that
the sayd goods were all delivered att Cadiz as he hath predeposed
and further cannot depose.

To the 5th Interrogatory he saith that the goods laden by the sayd persons
in other shipps were peice goods made up in packes fardles
and fatts and Chests, but of what sorts they were and how much
every particular person did lade or to what value he cannot sett forth
and further saving his foregoeing depositions he saith
he cannot depose.
[?xxxx] [?xxxx] [signature, rh side]
----
The 24th of January 1653

The Clayme of Dirrick de Dobler)
and others for their goods in)
the shipp Justice)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

pd

2

Joachim Behne of Hamburgh master
of the sayd shipp the Three Kings of Hamburgh
aged 34 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.558v Annotate
To the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6 articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that he knoweth well the arlate Dirick Dobler the father
and Dirick Dobler the sonn and allso Gerada Peters, the widdowe
Wessells, and John Jacobsen Carpfanger, Abraham Vander weeden
and John deekins. And saith that the sayd Dirick Dobler the father
and the sayd Carpfanger, Vander weeden and Deekins the Claymers
in this Cause were and are all merchants and Burghers of Hamburgh
and such as foe drive a trade betwixt Hamburgh and ffrance
and that the sayd Gerard Peters and the widdow Wessells are by
birth Hamburghers and reside and live att Nantes and
doe much busines in factorage for accompt of Hamburghes
merchants and particularly for the sayd Claymers, and
the sayd Dirick Dobler the younger who is now sayd to be resident
in ffrance att Nantes to learne the Lingua was and is a native
of Hamburgh. The premisses this deponent knoweth to be true
being himselfe borne in Hamburgh and there hath lived all his
tyme, and hath seene and observed the dealing and factorage
that the sayd Peters and Wessells have held and kept for the [?XXX]
merchants of Hamburgh, And for such persons the sayd
Claymers and factors att Hamburgh and Nantes are commonly
observed reputed and taken to be. And further or otherwise
being noeway privy to the lading of the goods now in question he
saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he knoweth not the sayd shipp Justice but hee knoweth
well all the persons aforesayd videlicet the sayd Dobler the younger hee
knoweth from his childhood and the rest of the sayd persons
before mentioned for 20 yeares and upwards. And otherwise
saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the 2. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith he hath knowne the sayd Peters and Wessels twelve
yeares and upwards, and att Nantes 3 yeares or thereabouts
and there they doe busines for Hamburgh merchants as aforesaid
but how long they have in certaine lived there or whether
they pay contributions att Nantes or trade for themselves
or for Hollanders or others of the United Provinces he saith
he knoweth not and further cannot depose.

To the fourth he saith he cannot depose

Johan [?XX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day Examined upon the sayd allegation

3)

pd

John Bland of Saint Olaves Hart street London
merchant aged 37 yearrs or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first and second Articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that the arlate Dirick Dober is a merchant of Hamburgh
of great quality and repute and so accounetd and was there
borne And saith that the sayd Michael Heytman is a [?SXXXX]
and doth not understand the English tongue, and upon this
deponents
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.559r Annotate
deponents reading over to him in the Dutch tongue the Copie of the deposition or examination
transmitted from ffalmouth, wherein is sayd that the sayd Heytman
did declare that the wines and other goods now aboard the sayd shipp
were all for the accompt of Mr Dobler of Hamburgh and for none
else or to that purpose the sayd Heytman did thereupon declare and
say that his examination in that particular was not truly sett downe
and that he had declared upon his examination that he was freighted
by Mr Dobler and for accompt of Hamburghers according to his
bills of lading. And saith that the sayd Dirick Dobler the father
being a Correspondent and kinsman of this deponent did about
12 monethes agoe send his son the arlate Dicick Dobler the
younger from Hamburgh to London about busines concerning
himselfe, and the sayd young man lodged in this deponents howse
till about June last past 1653 and then by his fathers order
went over from hence to Nantes to looke after his fathers busines
there and to learne the language and see the Countrey. and saith
that the sayd young man upon his arrivall att Nantes did by letters
acquaint this deponent that he had taken up his lodging with the 
arlate widdow Wessells and Gerard Peters Correspondents of
his father and doeing busines for him and other merchants of
Hamburgh, and requested this deponent to direct letters to him
thither, which thos deponent accordingly did. And saith that about
the latter end of November last past he this deponent received
a letter from the sayd Dirick Dobler the younger from Nantes dated
in the sayd moneth and that he therein certifyed this deponent
that he was taking to freight the arlate shipp Justie Dirick
Heytman Master to carry a lading of wine and goods for his
father to Hamburgh. and in December last past this deponent
receyved another letter from the same youngman dated from Nantes
wherein he signifyed that he had freighted and laded the sayd
shipp with wyne brandy and prune, for accompt of his father
and that there came along also some small quantityes of like
goods for accompt of the sayd John Jacobson Carpfanger Abram
Vander weeden and John Deakins of Hamburgh all consigned
for Hamburgh, desiring this deponent to procure a passport
here for safe passage of the sayd shipp and goods to Hamburgh
and the sayd letter was delivered to this deponent long before
this deponent had any notice of the seizure in question, and was
and is a true letter and not feigned or Colourable, And this
deponent hath likewise receaved severall other letters from the sayd
person all to the same effect and all reall and true and before
the newes of the sayd seizure, as also a letter from Dirick Dobler
the father from Hamburgh intimating that he did expect
a shipps lading of ffrench wines and goods from his son and
Agent att Nantes. And further cannot depose./

To the 2 article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he
hath
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.559v Annotate
he heard the sayd Michael Heytman say and averr that in case
he would have taken in unfree goods aboard his shipp hee might
have double the freight he is now to have for his ladeing [?it ?is]
true this deponent did give particular and strict charge to the
sayd youngman Dirick Dobler he should be very careful
in what ships and among what goods hhe did or should att any
tyme lade goods for his father and should take speciall heed that
any goods should be free as to this Commonwealth. And further
saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith he cannot depose.

To the fifth he saith he understandeth by his Correspondencye
and letters of the saud Dirick Dobler father and sonn that
the arlate John Jacobson Carpfanger, Abraham Vander Weiden
and John Deekins are Hamburghers and merchants of
Hamburgh and there living and that the sayd Peters and
sayd widdo Wessells doe busines for them as for others
of Hamburgh. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interogatoryes.

To the .1. he saith he hath knowne the sayd Dirick Dobler the father
by fame and report many yeares being the Cousin german of this
deponents mother. and hath heard the sayd Dobler the younger
say often that his father did use to send much goods to the sayd
Peters and sayd widdow, and otherwise saveing as aforesayd he
cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith he cannot depose.

To the 3d. he saith he doth not know the persons of the sayd Wessell and
Peters, but by correspondencye hath heard that they are natives
of Hamburgh as likewise was the husband of the sayd Wessell
and that they live att Nantes and doe busines there as factors
for Hamburgh merchants. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .4th. Interrogatory he saith that the sayd Master of the Justice
as per his owene declarations to this deponent, and the letters
of the sayd Dirick Dobler the younger, is to receyve his
freight all att Hamburgh of and from the respective persons
for whom the goods are according to their respective shares
therein. And otherwise cannot depose.

Jo: Bland [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontests before
the Judges in Court.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.560v Annotate
of Hamburgh and subiects of the free State thereof and so
commonly accounted reputed and taken. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the 5th he saith he cannot depose saving that he hath many times [#]

[#] [LH MARGIN AT 90 DEGREES]
heard the sayd Claes Colbrand say that the Laders of the sayd plate in question or Cashiers
who brought the same on board with bills of lading to be signed for the same did
say and averr to him the sayd Claes that the sayd sylver was all for accompt of the merchants
Hamburghers to whom the same was consigned in the sayd bills of lading and hath
likewise often heard the sayd Colbrandt say that in case he had any cause to
have suspected the confreenes of the sayd sylver as belonging to ffrench men or
Hollanders he would not have receyved the same aboard Michael Van Lubkan [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1 and 2. he saith that he knoweth not the sayd shipps Crowne
Imperiall and Patriarke Jacob or knoweth their burthen or for
whom they came to and from Cadiz.

To the 3. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith he cannot depose otherwise than as aforesaid

To the 5th he saith that about 3 yeares afoe the sayd Anthonio de Labistraet sent in the Morning
Starr this Rendent Master a bout 40 barrells of wax, and Hans [?Gerts]
severall parcells of Linnen, and ffrancis Sloyer a quantitye of
linnen Cloath and some Cynamon, Daniel Brands about 38 [?parcells]
of Linnen he being the partner of Jeronimo Snitger, Adrian
Younger a good quantity of wax Joachim Van Campen severall
barrells of knives and some bales of linnen, Albert Ankelman
a Great quantity of Linnen, Peter and Arnold Rulands a great
quantitye of Linnen, and ffrancis Wallich a quantity of Linnen
and John Baptista Yonker some linnen and some wax, all which
were delivered by this Rendent for their respective accompts to
their factors att Cadiz but the values or particular quantityes of the
sayd goods the tyme being now long since and this Rendent having
not the Roll of his sayd voyage he cannot sett forth And further
or otherwise cannot depose

Michell Van Lubkan [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 25th day of January 1653

The Clayme of John Waters)
Robert Crowley for the)
shipp John and Isaack)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Smith dt.

(3

Phillip Hemings of Wapping mariner late steward
of the sayd shipp aged 49 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that in May June July August September October November
December and January 1652 the arlate John Waterer Robert
Crowley Richard Allen John King and Company all Englishmen
and subiects of this Commonwealth were and still are or ought to
be the true and lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp the John and Isaack
and that the sayd Roger Lawerence within the sayd tyme was master
of her, and that the sayd shipp in her Course from the Barbadoes
to this Port of London about 14 leagues off of Scilly was taken
and surprized by a Sea Rover and carryed into ffrance all which
this deponent knoweth for that hee was steward of the sayd shipp
within the sayd tyme and present on board her att the seizure and
saith he hath Credibly heard aswell by the sayd Captaine Lawrence
as severall others that have bene lately att Plymouth that the
sayd shipp is now there and called by the name of the John of Saint Mallos
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.561r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp 9 yeares and saith she
was built in Holland and she was by the sayd Lawrence for the use
of the sayd owners bought of one Mr Millet a merchant of Bristoll
the former owner of her videlciet att Dover 9 yeares agoe and upwards
and knoweth the sayd persons Claymers are Owners of her because
they had possession of her as Owners for neere 8 or 9 yeares of the
knowledge of this Rendent and further or otherwise being not a
witnes to the bill of sale of the same cannot depose.

To the 2d he saith he saw not any money payd for the sayd shipp

To the 3. negatively for his part.

To the 4 he saith the sayd Owners lost possession of the sayd shipp
towards or about the latter end of the summer 1652. and further
saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

To the 5th he saith the sayd shipp when she was lost ha about 16 gunns
mounted and 4 in the hold and had all her masts and rigging
competent and fitt for service, and she was then worth with her
furniture and appurtenances the summe of 1000 li in the Judgement
of this deponent.

To the 6th he saith the sayd shipp was at her seizure neere upon 300
Tonnes burthen and this Rendent last saw her in the sayd Owners poffsession
by Captaine Lawrence and shipps Company about 14 leagues off of
Scilly att sea towards the latter end of summer 1652 and saw her
in ffrance about 7 dayes after that, and since that tyme hath
not seene her, and the sayd shipp now at Plymouth called the John
and Grace this Rendent is well assured is the same shipp with
the John and Isaack because severall persons who have seene her
as they say lately att Plymouth have averred to this Rendent that she
is the same, and that she hath the John and Isaac upon her sterne
in Carved worke, as the foresayd shipp the John and Isaack had
when this Rendent was Steward of her as aforesayd. And further
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.561v Annotate
The 25th day of January 1653

The Lord Protector against the silver)
in the Patriarke Jacob)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

pd

3)

Captaine Joachim Behne of Hamburgh
Commander of the shipp the three Kings of
Hamburgh aged 34 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th articles of the sayd aallegation This deponent saith
that being a native of Hamburgh and a sea faring man Master
of a shipp belonging to that port and having there lived
all his tyme and done busines for the persons interressed
in the sylver now claymed named in a schedule now read unto
him he saith

[ADD DATA]

the persons are all of them great traders
for Cadiz and other places in Spayne and that they there have
and every of them hath and for severall yeares and moneths before
their goods and make them returned for Hamburgh sometymes
in goods some tymes in sylver

this deponent in particular who in the
very last summer being att Hamburgh did see and onserve
that the sayd persons said send severall quantityes of peice goods
in severall shipps from Hamburgh consigned to Cadiz
and particularly in the shipp Crowne Imperiall Hans Meynerson
master, the ffortune Barent Carpfanger master the Hector
Claes Noller Master and other shipps whose names this deponent
att present particularly remembreth not And otherwise cannot
depose saving that he hath knowne the arlate Claes Moller
and Claes Colbrandt 23 yeares and upwards during  all which
time
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.562r Annotate
tyme thye have bene and are respectively Skippers Inhabitants
and Burghers of Hamburgh and subiects of the free state thereof
and by common repute they were and are respectively
Natives of Hamburgh. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 5th he saith he cannot depose saving that the first tyme [#]

[# LH MARGIN, TEXT AT 90 DEGREES]
that this deponent saw and spoke with the sayd Claes Colebrandt in this Citty which was about 8 weekes agoe and discoursing with him about the sylver
now in question this deponent asked him if he had any cause to suspect that any part of the sayd sylver were of the Hollanders or ffrenchmen or lyable to
confiscation here, and the sayd Claes Colbrandt thereto replyed that he had not any such suspition nor cause of suspition, for that the Laders of the
sayd sylver did seriously protest unto him att the lading thereof that the same was onely and truly for the accompt of Hamburghers to whom the same
was consigned in the bills oflading and that he did beleive really that the sayd Laders did not falsefy therein or to that effect, and the sayd Claes
Colbrandt did then and hath severall tymes since that tyme declared and affirmed to this deponent that in case he had had any doubt
[XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX] [XXXX] [XXX] [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 2. he saith the Crowne Imperiall is of the burthen of about
250 tonnes of about 16 gunnes and the Patriarke Jacob
is about the like  burthen or something more. And further
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4)

Daniel Straetman of Hamburgh Commander
of the Saint Peter of Hamburgh aged 37 yeares or thereabouts sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
the arlate Antonio de Labistraet, Hans Gardts, ffrancis Sloyer
Daniel Brands and Jeronimo Snitgar Adrian Youncker Joachim
Van Campen Paradins sonn Albert Anquelman, Peter and Arnold
Rulands ffrancis Wallich and John Baptista Younker are and
every of them respectively well knowne to this deponent and
the least tyme that he hath knowne any of them hath bene seven
yeares, and saith that for and during all the sayd tyme every
one of them severally and respectively hath bene and is a
Burgher Citizen Inhabitant and merchant of Hamburgh
and a subiect of the free state thereof, and hath used and doth
use a constant trade in linnen wax and other peice goods
from Hamburgh to Cadiz and parts of Spaine theabouts
receyving returnes to Hamburgh from thence, where they
have their severall factors and correspondents in goods and
sylver which by reason of the great importation of that metall
from the Indies to those parts of Spaine was and is an
ordinary Returne from those parts. All which this deponent
being
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.562v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

And this
deponent himselfe in the yeare 1648. 1649 1650 1651
and 1652. using the trade betwixt Hamburgh and Cadiz
did carry goods from all the sayd persons from Hamburgh to
Cadiz and in every of the sayd yeares from most of all
the sayd persons and did bringe returnes to them in
Hamburgh from Cadiz and their factors there some in goods
and a good part in plate sylver and moneyes. And
further saith that in May last past the arlate ffrancis
Sloyer did freight a shipp of Hamburgh Peter Nove
Master from Hamburgh for Cadiz wherein all or the
greatest part of the sayd persons did of this deponents observation
send Adventures in packed goods, and goods in chests
and fatts as linnens buckrams and wax and fustians
and the like goods usually exported from Hamburgh to
Spayne, Many of which goods were  brought a shipboard
in the sight of this deponent who departed and came from
the port of Hamburgh and River of the Elve in May
last with his owne ship [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] in Company of the sayd
Peter Nove and his shipp which was bound for Cadiz and
this deponent for Madera And further that
he this deponent knoweth well Claes Moller and Claes
Colbrandt arlate and so hath done .20. yeares and upwards
and they and eyther of them for all the sayd tyme have beene
and now are skippers Burghers and Inhabitants of Hamburgh
and subiect sof the free State thereof. and so accounted
And saith further that all the sayd persons aswell merchants
as skippers arlate were and are and every of them was and
is by common and generall repute natives of Hamburgh
Antonio de Labistraet excepted who hath lived in Hamburgh 30 yeares, but was borne in Antwerpe And further cannot depose saving that he hath credibly heard
that the foresayd merchants did send adventures to Cadiz in
the Crowne Imperiall Hans Meyners master about July last
past, as is arlate, and saving that in yeare 1652 he well remembreth
that he this deponent brought good returnes of sylver from Cadiz for Adrian
Younker and Jochim von
Campen aforesayd.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.563r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

----
The 26th day of January 1654

Examined upon the sayd allegation

5)

Claes Colbrandt of Hamburgh Captaine and
Commander of the sayd shipp the Patriarke Jacob
aged 50 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the first article of the sayd allegationThis deponent saith that the arlate
Antonio de Labistraat Hans Garts the younger, ffrancis Sloyer, Adrian
Younker Joachim van Campen the sonn of Paradom, Albert Anquelman
Peter and Arnold Rulands ffrancis Wallich and John Baptista
Younker for whose accompt this deponent did receyve severall
quantities of sylver aboard his said shipp the Patriarke Jacob (as
in his former deposition taken in this cause whereto he referreth
himselfe is sett forth) for these many yeares now last past have
bene and att the respective tyme and tymes of lading of the
sylver now in question were and att present are great and Vonstant
Traders in merchandizes betwixt Hambrugh and Spaine and
have had and have their severall Agents and Correspondents residing
att Cadiz and other places in Spaine for the better mannageinge
of the sayd trade and so much this deponent saith is well and
generally knowne att Hamburgh to Masters of shipp and
Merrchants belonging to that port and hath bene many yeares
observed by this deponent who hath knowne all the sayd persons
15 yeares and upwards and many of them a longer tyme, and
knew well and was acvquainted with the fathers of many of 
them, who did in their tyme themselves use the same tradeing
to Cadiz, and brought up their sons in the same. And this deponent
partly by his owne observation and partly by discourse with shippers
of Hamburgh knoweth that the foresayd persons send goods from
Hamburgh to Cadiz yearely in severall shipps using that course
for trade betweene Hamburgh and Cadiz and otherwise hee saith
hee cannot depose saving that he came to take particular notice of the
trade of the sayd persons for that he himselfe hath formely carryed
goods from them to Spaine and brought them returnes back to Hamburgh

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or
about the month of June last past the Hector of Hamburgh Claes
Moller master did arrive safely att Cadiz of the knowledge of this deponent
who the very next day came to the bay of Cadiz with his sayd shipp Patriarle Jacob
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.563v Annotate
and saith that the says shipp Hector was then well laden with sorts of peice goods
usually exported from Hamburgh which as the sayd Moller then
sayd were laden att Hamburgh and the sayd Claes Moller being
a freind of this deponent and one that sent some moneyes in this
deponents shipp this deponent had then and there the sight and
perusall of his shipps booke and Roll, and there by it did
appeare that the foresayd persons merchants of Hamburgh
severally mentioned as aforesayd, had Adventures severally
of good value in the sayd shipp Hector, which not long after
of this deponents sight tooke in a lading of woolls att Cadiz, after such tyme as she
had there made delivery of the sayd peice goods, and as since safely 
arrived with the sayd woolls att Dunkerke, whither the same were
consigned. And otherwise to this article saving his foregoing
depositions he saith he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation he saith that the foresayd
merchants as this deponent hath Credibly heard did send
severall good quantityes of peice foods from Hamburgh
about July last aboard the Crowne Imperiall Hans
Meynerson Master, and this deponent being in the Bay of Cadiz
with the shipp Patriarcke Jacob in August last then saw the sayd
shipp the Crowne Imperiall safely arrive in the saud bay
where her lading was safely delivered, and this deponent then
att Cadiz in discourse with the sayd Meynerson upon discourse of his
voyage heard him say that he came directly from Hamburgh and that
his goods were there laden by Hamburghers and that Harry Garts, Adrian
Youncker, ffrancis Sloyer and Daniel Brands with Jeronimo Snitgger of [##]

[## LH MARGIN] of whome this deponen
made particular enquiry
had severall peeces
aboard his shipp which
they laded for their
owne Accompt. And
otherwise cannot depose
Class Kalabaat [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation, This deponent saith that the
foresayd merchants of Hamburgh videlicet the arlate Antonio
de Labistraat Hans Gartsen ffrancis Sloyer, Daniel Brands and Jeronimo Snitger Adrian Youncker Joachim van Campen
Paradins sonn Albert Anquelman Peter and Arnold Rulands
ffrancis Wallich and Jochim Baptista Youncker severally before
named, and allso the arlate Claes Moller in the moneth of
October last past and the tyme and tymes of lading the severall
parcells of sylver and moneyes now in question, and for
15 yeares before of the certaine knowledge of this deponent
were and att present are Burghers and Inhabitants of Hamburgh
and subiects of the free state thereof and so accounted and
every one of the sayd persons for all the sayd tyme hath bene and
is a Burgher and Inhabitant of Hamburgh and a subiect
of the free state thereof and for 15 yeares last past and upwards
they have bene well knowne so to be to this deponent who was as
he saithborne of Hamburgh parents descened from
Hamburghers through many generations, and was and is a citizen
of Hamburgh and there hath his wife and family and so hath had
29 yeares, and there hath dwelt or lived all his tyme, and
was and is a Burgher of the same Citty and a subiect of the
free state thereof. And the foresayd persons likewise were and
are all native Hamburghers, Antonio de Labistraat excepted
who is by birth an Antwerper and hath lived in Hamburgh
thirty yeares or thereabouts. And otherwise he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.564r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

for that he this deponent was
by his Owners and the Lords the States of Hamburgh absiolutely
forbidden to lade any such unfree goods 
And
somuch this deponent hath often tymes affirmed and declared
and the same being truth doth now by vertue of his oath
affirme and declare, and otherwise he cannot depose

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1 he saith the Patriarke Jacob came to Cadiz in June
last past, and the Crowne Imperiall in August last past and
both the sayd shipps remayned there in the bay of Cadiz till
towards the latter end of October last past and then sett sayle
in Companye together.

To the 2. he saith the Patrarcke Jacob is of the burthen of 280
tonnes more or lesse., and hath 18 gunnes mounted and
Crowne Imperiall is of about the like bignes, and hath about
16 or 18 gunnes mounted, and they were both bound for
Hamburgh.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.564v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The third day of ffebruary 1653.

The Clayme of Nicholas Wielande)
and others for the lading of the)
shipp the ffortune (whereof Sem)
Jacobson Pronck is master) Bud ffrancklin)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers

1

Jacob ffrancois of Lisle in fflanders
merchant aged 30 yeares or therabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet

To the 1. article of the sayd alleation This deponent saith that he knoweth
well and so hath done for severall yeares the arlate widdow of
John Coppens and Jaspar and John le Clerke and John de la
Villette and John Touriel and Anthony Daniel all and every
of which persons and likewise this deponent the arlate John ffrances
for many yeares last past. and in November and december 1653
arlate and since have driven and doe drive of the certaine
knowledge of this deponent (who hath taken special notice of
their delivery) a constant trade from Dunkerke Lisle [?XXX]
Antwerpe and other places in fflanders to Nantes and other places
in ffrance for wines and other goods and for all the sayd tyme have had and now
have their severall factors and Agents att Nantes and elswhere
in ffrance to and for the better mannageing of the sayd trade
And he hath credibly heard that the arlate Nicholas Niebault
and Anthony Herenstock (whose persons hee knoweth not have during
severally the like trade for the tyme arlate and that they soe
doe att present. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.565r Annotate
To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
moneth of December last past 1653. George Rozen Resident att
Nantes the factor of this deponent did att Pembeuf lade on board the arlate
shipp the ffortune whereof the sayd Sem Jacobsen Pronk is Master for
the reckoning of this deponent and his this deponents sole advantage
twenty tonnes of Aniow wyne, ten tonnes of Vouvray wyne and
one and thirty tonnes and 1/2 of Orleans wine in all sixty one
tonnes and 1 1/2 of wyne and six bales of paper making
four tonnes and marked with the marke in the margent, all

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

to be delivered att Dunkerke to Mr Peter Lams or his factor there
for the accompt of him this deponent which he knoweth for the reasons
hereafter in his ensueing deposition to the other followeing articles
of this allegation exprest. And otherwise cannot depose, saving
that in the month of December last past and before any newes there that the sayd shipp
was come to Plymouth he heard the arlate John Taville att Lisle
or Ryssell say and affirme that he expected twelve tonnes of
Vouvray wynes in the sayd shipp fortune for his owne accompt, from
his factor att Nantes, who was and is the said George Rozee, and
saveing that he verily beleiveth that the severall others persons
Claymers in this Cause did by their respective factors and for their
respective accompts lade aboard the sayd shipp att Nantes the severall
wynes and gooods mentioned in the severall bill sof lading remaining
in the REgistry of this Court for the same, all to be delivered to the
respective Consignataries in the sayd bills of lading allso mentioned.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.565v Annotate
the sayd Sem Jacobson Pronck with a colourable Charterparty
and a Colourable bill of lading in which the sayd goods, though
really for accompt of fflandrians, were entred for the accompt
and mentioned to be for the Accompt of Hamburghers and
consigned to Hamburgh. and the sayd letter this deponent saith
was and is true, and he beleiveth all the Contents thereof to be
reall and true. and for the particular contents of the sayd colourable
Charterparty and bill of lading (which he cannot declare otherwise
than by referring himselfe to the same,) he referreth himself
to the same now being in the Registry of this Court, where this
deponent hath seene the same marked in the margent of either
of them respectively '.W. IF. AD. IL.' and beleiveth that
the same were dound aboard the sayd shipp, and were made and sent
along in the sayd shipp for the preservation of the sayd wines therein
mentioned from seizure in ffrance as belonging to the subiects of
the King of Spaine, there being warres betwixt the sayd Crownes
and good peace and amity betwixt the Crowne of ffrance and State
of Hamburgh, and their subiects respectively. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation he saith that the foresayd letter
of George Rozee to this deponent did likewise make mention
of a true and reall Charter party that the sayd ship was furnisht with
and being now shewne a paper upon a file underwritten
George Rozee with whose handwriting this deponent is well
acquainted, and Sem Jacobson Pronck, he beleiveth that the same
was and is the sayd reall and true Charterparty, for the content
whereof he referreth himselfe to the sayd paper. And otherwise
cannot depose

To the .6.th he saith he cannot depose.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation Thi deponent saith that about the
beginning of October last past he this deponent did give order
and direction to the arlate George Rozee of Nantes and  one Peter
Bochard of Orleans this deponents factors to buy and provide
the sayd wynes and to lade the same together with the sayd
six bales of paper (which paper the sayd Bochart had formerly as this
deponent by letters understood videlicet about May last past bought
for this deponents use) all for the proper accompt of this deponent
and to consigne the same to the foresayd Peter Lams to be to
him delivered att Dunkerke for this deponents use videlicet this
deponent gave order touching the sayd Aniorn and vouvrey wines to the sayd
Roze and touching the sayd Orleans wyne and paper to yje
sayd Bochard And othrwise he cannot depose.

To the eighth and nynth articles of the sayd alleagtion This deponent aith that
the foresayd Peter Bochard in or about the month of May last
past did by order of this deponent buy the sayd 6 bales of paper
and in June last past certifyed this deponent that he had so
bought the same, and this deponent in August last did really and truly pay and
satisfy for the same .1588. livres 3 souz turnois videlicet .1278.
to ffaure of Rissell whom this deponent then  paid the said money att [?XXXX] upon Monsieur Henry Olivier and Company of Paris and
by him accepted and payd to the order of the sayd Buchard and the
[?rest]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.566r Annotate
rest was satisfyed by way of discompt upon former  reckonings and accompts
wherein the sayd Bochard stood debtor to this deponent. And further
that hee the sayd Peter Bochard did really buy and provide the foresayd
61 1/2 tonnes of Orleans wyne for this deponents use and he this deponent
really and truly satisfyed for the same by two bills of exchange which the
sayd Bochard by this deponents order drew upon Emanyuel Versppritt
the younger of Paris who accepted the same as himselfe by letters to
this deponent hath since signifyed and payd the same att Paris to the
Order of the said Buchard
and that the sayd Peter Buchard sent this deponent in a letter dated from Orleans (which
this deponent receyved in October last past at Rissell) two of the
seven papers or schedules arlate and now shewne him, videlicet the two
att the foot thereof .P. Bochard. which he saith were and are true
and reall and not false or colourable, and that the sayd Bochard in
another letter dated from Orleans (which this deponent did receyve
att Rissell in December old stile or beginning of Januart last oast 1653 new
sile) did send to this deponent one of the arlate seven papers or
schedules to say that touching the sayd Orleane wyne being an
invoyce thereof now shewne him and underwritten att the foot
thereof .P. Bochard. and the same was and is true and reall and
not false or Colourable. And moreover saith that the sayd George
Rozee according to this deponents sayd Order did really and truly
buy and provide the foresaid 20 tonne of Anion wine and 10 tonne
of Voubry wine for this deponents accompt and this deponent hath
really and truely payd for the same by two bills of exchange which
the sayd Rozee by this deponents order drew upon Jaques Polart
of Paris who accepted the sayd bills and payd the moneyes therein
drawne being about 5000 livers turnois in the whole to the
order of the sayd Rozee, and
somuch the sayd Jacques Polart hath since by  letters cetifyed this
deponent [#]

[# ADD LH MARGIN TEXT]

And saith that the sayd George Rozee did really and
truely lade the foresayd wines of Orleanne Anion and Vouvrey
and sayd paper att Pomben in the River Nantes for this deponents accompt aboard the sayd
shipp, and somuch hath certifyed this deponent in a letter dated
16th day of December .1653. new stile from Nantes which letter this deponent did
receive att Rissell about the latter end of December 1653 new stile.
And saith that the sayd letter was  and is true and reall

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.566v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the eleventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about the
beginning f December last past 1653. he this deponent then
expecting the sayd shippe the ffortune from Nantes did give order
to the arlate Peter Lams of Dunkerke to whom this deponents
sayd goods were consigned, that he the sayd Lams should write and
send a letter or letters unto the arlate Vincent dela Vbarr and Thomas
de Lavall to Dover Correspondents of the sayd Lams, and therein to
advise them that the sayd shipp ffortune under conduct of the sayd
Sem Jacobson Pronck was expected from Nantes or Pembeauf
with wynes consigned to Dunkerke, and to desire them in case the sayd
shipp should in her passage touch att Dover to procure a Convoy
to conduct the sayd shippe and wines safe to Dunkerke, and the sayd
Peter Lams did soone after certify this deponent that he had
written to his sayd Correspondents to the effect aforesayd according
to this Rendents desire and order.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.567r Annotate
To the 14th article of the sayd allegation he saith that in December last past and
for 3 yeares next before there was and ever since hath bene and is
Correspondency in the way of trade and merchandize betweeene this
deponent and the foresayd Peter Lambs to whom this deponents sayd
goods are consigned as aforesayd and knoweth that there was in December
last past and many monethes before, and still is Correspondency in
trade betweene the arlate John Teviell and Anthony Daniell and the
arlate John de la Villette, which this deponent knoweth by the
Correspondencyes himsefle holdeth with the sayd persons, but whether
the sayd Anthony Beerenbeck Correspondeth with them knoweth not. And
otherwise cannot depose.

To the 15th he saith that the arlate widow of John Coppens, Jasper and
John Clarke, this deponent, Jacob de Braningh, John Teviell Antony
Daniel and John de la Villette were and every of them was and is
a Native of fflanders and a subiect of the King of Spaine and so
accounted and that the sayd widdow and sayd Clerkes in December last
and ever since Dunkerke came last into the hands of the King of Spaine
were and are of this deponents knowledge Citizens and Inhabitants
of Dunkerke and so accounted. and this deponent hath all his tyme
bene an Inhabitant of Ryssell and there now hath his wife and family
and so hath had for theise 13 yeares last past. and the arlate John
de Vallette ever since Dunkerke became Spanish hath bene and
is an  Inhabitant of Dunkerke aforesayd, and this deponent likewise
know him there living 15 yeares agoe when Sunkerke was formerly
in the King of Spaines hands, and beleiveth that he continued there till
it became ffrench. and the sayd Jacob de Brunungs is a skipper
and Inhabitant of Newport in fflanders, but how long he hath there
lived this deponent knoweth not, and that the sayd Taviell for theis
twelve yeares last past hath bene and is a fellow citizen of this
deponent in Ryssell and there hath inhabited for all the sayd tyme and
so still doth with his wife children and family being a merchant
of great ranke there and well knowne to this deponent for and during
all the sayd tyme And that the sayd Anthony Daniel for 7 or 8 yeares
att the least hath lived and now doth live with his wife and family
in Bridges and was a Correspondent of this deponents father and
well knowne to this deponent. And saith that the sayd Peter Lams whom
this deponent hath well knowne about 8 yeares ever since Dunkerke
last came into the hands of the King of Spaine hath lived and now
doth live in Dunkerke with his wife a Native of Rissell and before
that for severall yeares whilest Dunkerke was ffrench lived att Ostend
videlicet 3 or 4 yeares, and before that 2 or 3 yeares att Rissell and
before that some yeeres att Dover, and was by repute borne att
Bridges. and the sayd persons soo severally named as aforesayd for all
the foresayd tymes respective were and are and every of them
was and is as ubiect of the King of Spaine and Neelandt and Herenbeck
were borne nor where they live, but hath heatd that they are
fflandrians and subiects of the King of Spaine. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 16th article of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose

To the 17th article of the sayd alleagtion he saith he verily beleiveth it to
be true that the severall mercahndizes laden aboard the sayd shipp
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.568r Annotate
To the 10th he saith that he this Rendent hath not ensured his foresayd
goods, nor any part thereof nor doth he know or hath heard of any
ensurance upon any of the rest of the goods in question.

To the 11th. he saith he cannot otherwise or further depose than
he hath above deposed.

To the last he saith that the sayd Rozee by letters did acquaint
this Rendent that he the sayd Rozee did lade this Rendents
fore mentioned goods for the Accompt and Adventure of him
this Rendent. And further cannot depose

Repeated in Court
before the three Judges.

ffrancois [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The sixth day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2

Nicholas Knight of Dunkerke in fflanders
aged 20 yeares or thereabouts, borne att
Dover in England a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

pd

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for theis
18 monethes last past or thereabouts he hath knowne the arlate
Nicholas Wielandt, the widdow of John Coppens, and Jasper and John Clerke
and Anthony Danoel for and during all which tyme the sayd persons did
drive and still doe drive and mannage a Constant trade from
the Ports and parts of fflanders to Nantes and elsewhere in ffrance
for wynes and have had and still have their factors and Correspondents
att Nantes and elsewhere in ffrance for the carrying on of that trade
all which he this deponent being servant and Cashier to the
sayd John de Vallette and by reason thereof having had notice
of and Correspondencyes upon severall occasions with the foresayd
persons hath well knowne seene and observed. And otherwise
cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or
about the moneth of December last past the foresayd persons
did by their factors, att Pembeuf lade on board the arlate shipp
the ffortune Sem Jacobson Pronk Master the severall parcells
of wynes and goods hereafter specifyed to be transported to Dunkerke and there delivered that is to say the
sayd Nicholas Wielandt did by [?the ?order ?of) Rozee lade aboard the sayd
shipp 24 tonnes of Orleans wynes and tenn tonnes of Vouvry
wine marked with the first marke in the margent for the accompt

'W8' [FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

of him the sayd Nicholas Wielandt to be delivered to this deponents
Master the sayd John de la Villette att Dunkerke for the use of the sayd
Wielandt the premisses he knoweth to be true for that in the moneth
of December last and long before there was any newes of the seizure
of the sayd shipp he this deponent did abd gave the said master [?XXX] [?that]
hee did expect severall parcells of wines for himselfe and freindes
from Nantes in the sayd shipp the ffortune bound for Dunkerke
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.568v Annotate
and hath seene two bills of layding of one tenor for the sayd producents parcells [?of]
wine, videlicet one sent to this deponent out of flanders [/XXXX] now [?and ?XX]
to the sayd allegation,. and the other upon [?a] file in the Registry of this Court and since his comeing to this Citty hath receyved an attestation
under the seale of the Citty of Antwerpe where in appeares that the
sayd Wielandt hath positively sworne before the Magistrates there
that the foresayd wines are his owne and that noe other person hath any
right or property therein or to that effect. which attestation This deponent
now leaveth in the Registry of this Court and saith that the same is sealed
with the Common and usuall seale of the Citty of Antwerpe in such cases
used. and that the sayd Widdow Coppens and Jasper and John Clerke did
as this deponent hath credibly heard by their factor or factors laade aboard
the sayd shipp six tonnes of Vouvry wine and more 5 tonnes of like
wyne of the second marke in the margent for their owne accomptes

'2 CB' [SECOND MARKE, LH MARGIN]

and hath likewise credibly heard that the factor or factors of the
sayd John ffrançois did lade aboard the sayd shipp for his
accompt 20 tonnes of Orleans wyne and 6. bales of paper marked

'3 IF' [THIRD MARKE, LH MARGIN]

with the third marke in the margent, ad doth the rather beleive
the same to be true for that he hath seene severall letters and
accompts sent by the sayd George Rozee to the sayd John ffrançois
wherein did appeare to this deponent that the sayd wynes and paper
were payd for by the sayd ffrancois by nils of Exchange att Paris
and that the sayd Rozee had bought and putt the sayd goods to his
accompte, and likewise hath seene accompts for part of the sayd
wynes and sayd paper under th hand of one Peter Bechard of
Orleance wherein the sayd Orleance wynes and sayd paper are putt to the
accompt of the sayd ffrancois. And saith that the arlate John de
La Villette this deponents master did by his factors and for his sole
accompt use and risgo lade aboard the sayd shipp the tyme and
place aforesayd five Tonnes of Orleans wines and five tonnes of
Veuvry wines marked with the fourth marke in the marhent

'4 SP' [FOURTH MARKE, LH MARGIN]

to be delivered att Dunkerke to the sayd John de La Villette for
his owne use and accompt, which hee knoweth to be true aswell
for that Monsieur Burvan and Company the Laders of the sayd wines
have bene and are the Constant Correspondents of this deponents sayd Master
and have receyved severall quantityes of goods of good value
from him, and for that he this deponent about the beginning of
December last past did heare his Master say that e did expect
such a like parcell of wynes by the sayd shipp, as for that since
his comeing into England videlicet about 14 dayes after the seizure
of the sayd shipp he this deponent receyved a letter from his sayd
Master wherein he certifyed this deponent that the sayd qynes were
his owne and sent withall a bill of lading receyved by him by
the post from Nantes wherein did appeare that the same were laden
for his Accompt which bill of lading this deponent caused to
be exhibited in this Court and hath seene another bill of lading for
the sayd parcell of wines of the same tenor that came along with the
sayd wines, and hath lately receyved an Attestation under the seale
of the Citty of Dunkerke whereby appeares that the sayd John de la
Villette hath there before the Magistrates positively sworne upon his
solemne Oath that the sayd parcells of wines were laden for his
acoompt
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.570v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he was borne att Dover in England, and there
lived from his childhood till about 18 monethes past, when he
went to Dunkerke and since hath lived there a servant to the
sayd John de la Villette. and otherwise negatively

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne John de la Valette (sic) 18 ,onethes
and John ffrancoy about a moneth, and saith that the persons
of widdow Coppens Jasp and John la Clerke, Jacob de Brunning
John Taviell SAnthony Horenbeck Anthony Daniel or any of
them he knoweth not, but by fame and letters and correspondency he
hath knowne all and every of them

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.571r Annotate
[#]

To the .8th he saith the sayd shipp ffortune begann her outwards voyage
this last summer (the particular tyme he remembreth not) from dunkerke
in her ballast. and knoweth not that the sayd Sem Jacobson Pronk had
or tooe any letters of Credit with hom whereby to take up monet
in ffrance to provide lading for the sayd shipp.

To the .9th. he saith that the sayd Master was to be payd his freight att
Dunkirke by the severall persons to whom his goods are to be
delivered according to his bils of lading as this Rendent hath
credibly heard and beleiveth.

To the 10th. he saith he cannot depose.

To the 11th. he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and otherwse cannot depose.

To the /12th. he saith that the Laders factors of the goods now Claymed
did never acquaint this Rendent for whose accompt and
upon whose adventure the sayd goods were laden.

Nicholas Knight [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The eighth day of ffebruary .1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3)

Sem Jacobson Pronck of Hamburgh
Mariner master of the sayd shipp the ffortune
aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To the .1. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate the
widdow of John Coppens, and Jaspar and John le Clarke, John
ffrancois and John de la Villette, all whom this deponent well
knoweth, are fflandrians and subiects of the King of Spaine
and are all and every of them, John Francois excepted who liveth
att Rissell, Inhabitants of Dunkerke, and are all of them
persons driving a trade from fflanders to Nantes and other places
for wine and other goods and have their factors for that purpose
and the sayd Wielandt Tavill Herembock and Daniel are likewise
by report fflandrians subiects of the King of Spaine using a
trade in ffrance for wines and other goods. And further he
cannot depose.

To the second and third articles of the sayd allegation and bills of lading arlate now shewne to and perused by this Examinate This deponent saith that
in the moneth of December last past he this deponent lyeing with
his sayd shipp in the River of Nantew, neere to Pembeuf, there
were laden aboard the sayd shipp [#]

[# LH MARGIN]
severall parcells of
[?wines] and goods to be discharged
[?at] Dunkerke, 
and as the sayd bills
of lading for the same
did and doe import
for the respective
accompts following
that is to say.
Dom Jacobsen pronch [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

for the accompt of the sayd Nicholas
Wielandt 24 tonnes of Orleans wine, and ten tonnes of Vouvray
wine of the first marke in the margent (to be delivered att Dunkerke
to John Clerke six tonnes, and more five tonnes all Vouvray
wine of the second marke in the margent to be delivered to them
att Dunkerke and for accompt of the sayd John ffrancois twenty
tonnes
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.574r Annotate
The nynth day of ffebruarrie 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

pd

4)

Ive Destra of Lisle in fflanders merchant
aged 21 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

knoweth that the said John ffrancois
for severall yeares now past hath and att present doth drive a
trade from Rissell or Lisle in fflanders to Nantes and other
places omn ffrance for ffremch wines and other goods, which
he knoweth being his neighbor in Lisle and having observed
his manner of trade and dealing. And othrewise he cannot
depose,

John ffrancois
in Rissell from Peter Bochard of Orleans his factor

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.575r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 1 he saith he was borne att Rissell where being a Bachelor
he liveth with his father and so hath done for a yeare now past
and upwards, and next before two yeares att Nantes, and before
that 5 yeares att Antwerpe, and before that with his father att Rissell
from a Child. And otherwise negatively.

[ADD DATA]
----
[?Due] Destre [CENTRE HEADING]

The 13th day of ffebruary 1653 Examined upon the sayd allegation

pd

[?5]

Thomas Delavall of Dover in the County of Kent
merchant aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.575v Annotate
To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That the
arlate Nicholas Wielandt and John de la Villette are by common
repute fflandrians and have for a good tyme now past bene
Correspondent of this deponent, by which Correspondency he
well knoweth that they are merchants using a trade betwixt
fflanders and ffrance for wines and other goods, having their
factors att Nantes and other places for that purpose. And otherwse
he cannot depose.

To the 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 and 10th articles of the sayd allegation hee saith
he cannot depose saving that having bene for five yeares last past
a Correspondent with the arlate George Rozee Residing att Nantes
he is well acquainted with his handwriting, and being now shewne
severall papers annexed to the sayd allegation three whereof are
formes of Invoyces and signed severally George Rozee and
being shewne likewise severall bills of lading papers and [?some]
upon a file relating to the Cargazon of goods now in question
one whereof beares the forme of Agreement of Charter party and
is written in dutch and signed. George Rozee. Sem Jacobson
Pronck. This deponent is well assured that theis words George
Rozee whereby the sayd three Invoyces and sayd Charter party are [?under]
were and are the proper handwriting of the arlate George Rozee
residing att Nantes with whose character this deponent is well
acquainted for the reasons aforesayd. and otherwise cannot depose

To the 11th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he this deponent
in the month of October last last 1653 received a letter from the
arlate Peter Lams of Dunkirke bearing date in the
same moneth from dunkirke and written to this deponent
and the arlate Vincent de la Barr in which letter the sayd Peter
Lams did give advise that the shipp ffortune Sem Jacobson
Pronck Master was att Nantes and was to come with a lading of
wynes to himselfe and freinds to dunkirke and thereupon made
his Request that this deponent and sayd Delabarr upon the sayd
shipps comeing to or neere Dover would use meanes to provide
the sayd shipp with a Convoy to waft her and her lading safe
to Dunkirke or to the like effect. And further saith that in the
moneth of January no last past and before the 17th day of
the sayd moneth English stile, he this deponent did receyve [?another]
letter from the sayd Peter Lams dated 13. January. 1654. new
stile from Dunkirke written to this deponent and the sayd Mr De la barr to the effect
in the former letter mentioned adding with all that he the sayd Lams
thought it strange that he heard not of her the sayd ship fortune and wished this deponent
and sayd Mr de la barr (whow were and are the Correspondents of the sayd
Peter Lams.) to enquire after her and in case they heard of her
to give what assistance to her and her lading should be re[?quisite]
or to the like effect. And he beleiveth that in case the sayd shipp
had not bene seized in the downes she would have come to dover
for Convoy and somuch he hath heard the sayd Sem Jacobson Pronck
affirme who was furnished by the sayd George Rozee with a
letter to this deponent and the sayd de la barr for the providing of
Convoy
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.576r Annotate
Convoy for the sayd shipp from Dover to Dunkirke as the sayd Sem
Jacobsen did acquaint this deponent and further cannot depose saving that hee
did in the month of December last receive another letter from the saud Mr Lams dated
[?2nd] December 1653. from Dunkirke to the effect of the former letter.

To the 12th and 13th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that 3 of
the persons named in the bills of lading for this Cargazon as  and for
Laders are well knowne to this deponent videlicet George Rozee
Peter Basserade ad Peter Coppens this deponent having Correspondency
with them all three videlicet with the sayd Rozee for five yeares last
or thereabouts abd with the sayd Basserode for 7 yeares last past and
with the sayd Coppens for the same tyme And saith by common repute they
are all fflandrians and reside att Nantes as factors and merchants
strangers. And this deponent by his Correspondencyes with them well
knoweth that they are factors for fflandrian merchants, and doe much
busines for them att Nantes. and that the sayd Basserode and Coppens
are in partnershipp, and mannage their factory in Company together
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith he cannot depose.

To the 15th he saith the arlate Nicholas Wielandt John de la Villette
and Peter Lams are subiects of the King of Spaine and by repute
all of them fflandrians, and are all three of them correspondents
of this deponent by which correspondency he knoweth that the sayd
Nicholas Wielandt liveth att Antwerpe. and John de la Villette and
Peter Lams att Dunkirke, and furthe rnot knowing the rest of
yhe parties arlate

To the 16. and 17th articles he saith he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. he saith he was borne att Highgate and liveth att Dover
with his family and so hath done for theis ten yeares and
upwards. and further otherwise than negatively hee cannot depose.

To the 2. he saith he hath by correspondencyes knowne John de la
Villette living in Dunkerke about 18 monethes and Nicholas Wieland
who now lives att antwerpe and formely att valencina 2 or 2 monethes
and further saving as aforesayd cannot depose

To the .3d. he saith that the sayd Rozee for theis 5 yeares hath lived att
Nantes as allso have by report the sayd Bosserrda and Coppens who about
7 ueares agoe lived att Dover for five or six yeares And further saving
as aforesayd he cannot depose

To the 4th and 5th he saith he was not present att nor saw any of the goods in
question bought nor was att or neer Nantes att the lading thereof

To the 6 and 7th negatively.

To the 8th. 9. 10. and 11th he saith he cannot depose

To the last he saith he cannot depose otherwise than negatively

Tho: Delavall [SIGNATURE, BOTTOM, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.576v Annotate
The 18th day of february 165[?2]

On the part and behalfe of John Upton)
and Company Owners of 22[?6] bundles)
of hempe laden aboard a shipp called)
the freindshipp of Newcastle whereof)
one Edward Nixon was master seized )
att Copenhagen by the King of Denmarke)
or his Ministers. Clements)

Captaine Edward Nixon of
Newcastle Master of the Torrington
frigot in the immediat service of
this Commonwealth aged 33 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.577r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 21st day of ffebruary 1653.

Prince and Company against)
the shipp the Charity and giids)
in the same. Smith. Suckley)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Prince and Company

1)

Thomas Swinsen of Saint Michaels parish
in Crooked Lane London Cheesemonger aged
19 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

To the sayd allegation and Articles therein This deponent saith that
on or about the 17th or 18th dates of January last past he
this deponent was in Company with the arlate Paul Paulson
in the ouse of Mr Bingeon a victualling howse in Thames
Street London and the sayd Paulson did then and there say
and declare in the presence and hearing of this deponent
that the shipp Charity whereof he was master (measning and
speaking of the shipp Charity arlate) was laden with pitch
tarr deales Iron two masts and some small sparrs, and that
he the sayd Paulson had laden the same all for his owne accompt,
30 barrels of tarr or thereabouts excepted belonging to his
shipps Company 12 of which 30 barrels did as hee said belong to
his steersman, And that he bought and provided the same
for his owne accompt, and that for that reason videlicet because
the sayd goods were his owne he had neyther Charter party
nor bill of lading for the same or to the same effect. And
the same confession or acknowledgement or the like in effect
this deponent hath severall other tynes (and upon severall
occasions heard, the sayd Paul Poulson make and declare
in the presence and hearing of him this deponent. And
further or otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

Thomas Swynsen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.577v Annotate
The same day. Examined upon the sayd allegation.

dt. Prince

2

John Savinsen of Tower hill London
Mariner aged 17 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the foresayd allegation and two articles thereof, This deponent
saith that in the moneth of January last past and since the
seizure of the sayd ship the Charity he this deponent being
in Cmpany of the arlate Paul Paulson in the howse of [?Mr]
Prince in Thames street London did then and there heare
the sayd Paulson say and declare, that his shipp the
Charity (meaning and speaking of the ship Charity in
question) was  laden with Iron pitch tarr deales some spanns
and two masts and that all the sayd goods (30 barrells of
tarr excepted) did att the tyme of heir seizure belong to
himselfe

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.578r Annotate
B.3.

The seven and twentyeth day of January 1653

The Lord Protector of the Commonwealth)
of England Scotland and Ireland)
against the shipp the Morning)
Starr whereof Michael van)
Lubkin is Master and against the)
goods and sylver in the same And)
against Adrian younker and others)
comeing in for their Interest in)
[?speciall] and against all others in)
generall. Bud. Smith. ffran Flyn)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Adrian Yonnker and others
interressed in the sayd cause

[?XXX] and)
Vandeput)

Peter Cownow of Hamburgh
Mariner Boatswaynes Mate of the
sayd shipp the Mrning Starr aged
45 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the frigot
which first assaulted the sayd shipp the Morning Starr upon the
day she was seized which happened upon the 25th day of ffebruary 1652
old stile, was then of the sight of this deponent a Dutch built
shipp that is to say of the mould  fashion manner of building
used in the Netherland Provinces. but her name or place wher
she was built he saith he cannot declare. And otherwise he
cannot depose saving that the sayd shipp so first assaulting the
Morning Starr is in the processe of this cause where to he referrs
himselfe called the Advantage or Adventure frigot.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.586r Annotate
sylver of about 30 markes. and about 525. peices of eight

[ADD DATA]
----
The same day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

1)

Michael van Lubkin of Hamburgh Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Morning Star aged
31 yeares of thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
sailing in the sayd shipp the Morning Starr alongst the Coast of England
for dunkerke upon the 23th day of ffebruary 1652 old stile he espyed a
shipp att distance which afterwards proved to be the Advantage frigot that
made the fight in Controversy, and saith of his certaine sight the sayd frigot
then was dutch built and so appeared to be and had and wore out upon her
masts the ffrench waves that is to say white waves whereby ffrench vessells
are commonly notifiyed and distinguisht att sea from the shipps of other nations
and that she had not out any English Colors whereby the shipps of
this Commonwealth are usually knowne and distinguished from other shipps
And saith that the sayd shipp Morning Starr then had out the Hamburgh [?vanes]
or waves upon her masts, which he saith she likewise wore all the
way from Cadiz, And further that he this deponent according to Custome
upon the discovery of he sayd frigot did cause his Hamburgh Colors
being a Redd flagg to be putt out upon the sterne of his sayd shipp
thereby
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.589v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The tenth day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

dt ffor and G. vandepost.

5.

Captaine Roger Garland of Stepney in the County of
Middlesex Mariner aged fifty yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the 18th article of the sayd allegation he saith that he this deponent
hath bene a sea faring man upward of thirty yeares and for
all that tyme he hath observed that it hath bene and stille
continueth to be the practise of Pyrates and searovers to
carry in their shipps severall Colors of different Princes and
States and to weare them and charge them upon occasion 
for the advantage of their designe of seizing and [?desposing]
of trading shipps, sometymes putting out the Colors of the
trading shipps they meet with an sometymes the Colors
of the freinds of such trading shipps, and saith that by
reason of the sayd Pyraticall practise shipps that are [?XXX]
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.590r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day Examined upon the sayd allegation.

6)

Samuel Chamblett of the parish of Saint Botolph Billingsgate
Mariner aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the 18th article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that for theis
18 yeares last past he hath bene a sea faring man and for ten
yeares last past a Master of a shipp. And saith that for and
during all the sayd tyme and tymes respectively It was
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.590v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 11th day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

(7

Lambert Pitches of Hackney in the County of
Middlesex formerly Captaine of the vincent
in the service of this Commonwealth aged 49 yeares
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.591v Annotate
The 21th day of february 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

Phillips against the shipp the Paul and her)
lading and against the Lord Protector of)
the Commonwealth of England)

Examined uppon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Captaine Phillips

Rp.

1

Emanuel de Croix of Dunkerke in fflanders
merchant aged 28 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth.

To the 1. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate shipp
Dorset alias the Saint Jacob now called the Suckly and the [?proriety]
thereof was upon the fifth day of October 1653. last past by decree
of this Court rightly and duely adiudged to this deponent
by vertue of the sayd decree this deponent was putt into the actuall
possession of the sayd shipp with her tackle and furniture And
further saith that for eight or ten monethes next before the
fifth day of October 1653. and untill the 28th day of November
11653 He this deponent was the true and lawfull Owner and Proprietor
of the sayd shipp the Dorset otherwise the sayd Jacob and now called the
Suckly and so accounted. And referring himselfe to the foresayd decree
and Acts of this Court cannot further depose

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon or
about the sayd 28th day of November 1653 aforesayd, Hee this
deponent for a valuable consideration did really sell [?license]
or passe over unto the arlate Isaack Phillips the foresayd shipp the
Jacob otherwise the Dorsett now called the Suckly and her tackle
furniture and apparrell by the name of the Saint Jacob of Dunkerke
And saith that the foresayd Isaack Phillip did
for the sayd shipp really and truely satisfy and pay unto this deponent the summe of
one hundred and fifty pounds of lawfull English money that
is to say 70 li sterling in ready moneys and the Remaynder being 80 li by [?meanes]
of discompt for the like summe of 80 li sterling for [?XXX]
for which the sayd Captaine Phillips had formerly engaged himselfe
for this deponent to severall persons for reall debts of this
deponent which he the sayd Phillips hath satisfyed and payd
and saith that the foresayd 150 li was really payd and this deponent
thereof fully satisfyed before the sayd shipp went out upon the
voyage wherein she tooke the shipp Paul arlate and somuch thois
deponent did severall tymes acknowledge before the sayd shipp
went out upon the sayd voyage. And otherwise he cannot
depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.592r Annotate
To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after
such tyme as the sayd shipp was so sold the arlate Captaine Isaac
Phillips named her the Suckly, and did by vertue of a Commission
by him obtained from this Court for the setting out of a shipp named
the Suckly against the shipps and goods of the States of the United
Provinces and their subiects, and the ffrench King and his subiects
and in order to the execution thereof equipp and victuall put
the sayd shipp the Suckly formerly as aforesayd called the Dorset
alias the Saint Jacob and did constitute and appoynt the arlate
Martin Williams Captaine and Commander thereof, and did
here att London deliver the sayd Commission of merque
under the great seal of this Court to the
sayd Williams in the presence of this deponent
in order to take the same with him to sea and putt it in execution
according to the tenor and effect thereof which the sayd Williams undertooke to do accordingly And otherwise
saith he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.592v Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories

Row dt.

To the 1 hee aith he last saw the Suckly frigot att the Vowes before the
seizure of the Paul, and is sure the shsipp Suckly formerly called
the Dorset alias the Saint Jacob were and are the same shipp and not divers but saith
the same is now lost and sunke in the sea.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.593r Annotate
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2)

Martin Williams of Cowes in the Isle of Wight
Mariner late Captaine of Suckly frigat, aged
42 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

Rp.

To the 1. and 2. of the sayd allegation This deponent saith Tat about
October last past the sayd shipp the Dorset alias the Saint Jacob now called the
Suckly was by a decree of this Court adiudged to his precontest
Emanuel de Croiz who was thereupon putt in possession thereof

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.594r Annotate
B4

[?In] the behalfe of Elizabeth [?Pett] he))
[?] and [?ExXX] Case he last with and [?])
[?] Peter Pett deceased against the shipp)
the  [?so] hereof Edward Thompson  was)
[?paid] against Maurice Thompson] and)
[?] [?Budd] Smith)

The sixth day of March 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]
Examined upon a Libell on the behalf
of the sayd Elizabeth Pett.

'William Hayward' of Ratcliffe Shipwright
aged 24 yeares or thereabouts a witness 
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
following videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd Libell this deponent saith that the arlate Edward Thompson in the yeare
1648 and monethes therein respectively and especially in September
October November December January ffebruary and March 1648
and before and since was Master Captaine or Commaunder of the sayd
shipp the Ruth which he knoweth because he saw the sayd Thompson
in possession of the sayd shipp as Master and knoweth that during all the
sayd tyme he the sayd Thompson had the management of the
sayd Shipp for and as Master and for and as such the sayd Edward
for all the sayd tyme was and is accounted. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation or Libell this deponent saith that
in the yeare and monethes aforesayd the arlate [?Pather] Pett was
the true and lawfull Owner and Posesser of all and singular the
goods wares materialls and provisions mentioned in a Schedule to
the sayd Libell annexed and now shewne him and perused by him
which he knoweth for that he was during all the sayd tyme
Apprentice and booke keep to the sayd Peter Pett, and hath
faithfully extracted the sayd schedule which is [?nhally] [?writt] with
this deponents hande out of the sayd Peter Petts bookes of accompts
now in the possession of the sayd Elizabeth the [?] his [?Relict] and
[?Extrip]. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd Libell this deponent saith that within the 
tyme aforesayd and especially in the moneth of September 1648. the
foresayd shipp the Ruth did stand in need of repairing and thereupon
the sayd Peter Pett att the desire and reqwest of the sayd Edward
Thompson and by and with the privity and Consent of the arlate
Maurice Thompson and others owners of the sayd shipp (which sayd
Maurice Thompson did of this deponents sight often come and see
the repairing of the sayd shipp.) did deliver to the sayd Edward
Thompson and such as he appoynted to receyve the same all and
singular the goods wares materialls and provisions mentioned in
the foresayd schedule, and the same were all delivered aboard the
sayd shipp Ruth and wrought and incorporated into her for her
need full repair and fitting her for a voyage in the monethes
above named by this deponent and other workemen and Artificers
employed in and for the doeing of the sayd worke. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that all and singular
the goods wares materialls and provisions in the sayd schedule
mentioned were att the tyme of their being so wrought into and upon
the sayd shipp work the severall and respective values in the sayd
Schedule severally and respectively mentioned, which he knoweth for
that
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.595r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

On the behalfe of Elizabeth Pett the Relict)
and Executrix of Peter Pett deceased against)
the shipp William and George whereof
[?XXX] Allen was Master and against John
Allen and Company et cetea Budd. Smith.)

Examined upon a Libell on the behalfe
of the sayd Elizabeth Pett

Budd dt.

1)

William Hayward of Ratcliffe
shipwright aged 24 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet

the sayd Allen as the sayd Carpenter diid
then say and the sayd Allen did afterwards acknowledge in the presence
and hearing of this deponent who being att that tyme Ap[prentice
and booke keeper to the sayd Peter Pett there by well knoweth
that the sayd Peter within the tyme aforesayd was the law full
Owner and Possessed of all and singular the goods materialls and
provisions mentioned in a schedule to the sayd alleagtion or Libell annexed
now seene and perused by him and underwritten with this deponents
name att the foot thereof...
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.595v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2)

dt. Bud

William Bower of Ratcliffe one of the Labourers
in the yard of Mr Pett shipwright aged 42
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth.

To the 1. 2. 3. and 4th articles of the sayd Libell This deponent saith that hee
knoweth the arlate shipp the William and George and so hath
for 3 yeares or thereabouts and that in the yeare 1651. the arlate
Captaine Allen was Master of the sayd shipp and so accounted, and saith that
about Michaelmas in the same yeare the tyme he otherwise remembreth
not the sayd shipp stood in need of reparations, and that the arlate
Peter Pett att the Request of the sayd Allen or his Assignes by
him imployed in repaire of her did furnish severall materialls
for the fitting of her out to sea many of which materialls and
provisions for the needfull repair of the sayd shipp he this deponent
being then a Labourer in the sayd Peter Petts yard att Ratcliffe did woth
his owne hands deliver to the Carpenter of the sayd shipp. and saith he
saw the sayd shipp repaired, and the materialls so furnished by the
sayd Pett wrought into and upon the sayd shipp by the sayd Carpenter
and his assistants. And saith that the sayd Peter Pett was att the tyme
of delivery of the sayd materialls and provisions the true Owner and
possessor thereof and so accounted and verely beleiveth that the
materialls and provisions mentioned in a schedule to the sayd Libell
annexed and now shewne and read to this deponent, the totall summe
the valew whereof amounts to 28. li 3. s 11. d were and are the [?very]
materialls used in the repair of the sayd shipp and furnisht by the
sayd Peter Pett as aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.596r Annotate
To the .5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. and 11th articles of the sayd Libell this deponent saith
that the foresayd Peter Pett since the doeing of the sayd worke is departed this
life and left behind him the plaintiff Elizabeth who is his Relict and Executrix
and saith that the sayd summe of 28. li 3. s 1. d due for the sayd materialls
was as yet never payd or satisffyed to the sayd Peter Pett in his life
tyme or his since his death to the plaintiffe so farr as this deponent
who hath for theis ten yeares bene a Constant labourer in the sayd yard
ever knewe or heard, but hath often audibly heard that the ssame and
every part thereof is still unsatisfyed: whereupon the sayd Elizabeth
Pett hath arrested the sayd shipp which is bayled by the defendants
who are subiects of this Commonwealth and so accounted. And further
referring himselfe to the Acts of this Court and to the law he
saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1 and 2. Interrogatories he saith he cometh to be a witnes in this Cause
att the Request of the sayd Mrs Pett. and otherwise saving his
foregoeing depositions negatively. And further cannot depose.

William [MARKE] Bower his marke [MARKE, RH SIDE]

vid. testem .A.1.
21. Novembris .1654.
----
The one and twentyethth day of November. 1654.

On the behalfe of Elizabeth Pett against the)
shipp Ruth Edward Thompson Master)

Examined upon the sayd allegation or Libell.

dt. Bud.

2)

William Bower of Ratcliffe one of the
Labourers in the shipyard of Mr Pett Shipwright
aged 42 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth.
videlicet.

To the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5th articles of the sayd allegation or Libell This deponent
saith that he knoweth well the arlate shipp the Ruth and so hath done
five yeares and upwards, and saith that in the yeare 1648. and
towards the latter end of the same yeare the tyme otherwise att present
he remembreth not the arlate Edward Thompson was Master of her
and the arlate Mr Maurice Thompson one of her owners and so accounted
and that within the sayd tyme of the sight of this deponent she the sayd
shipp Ruth did stand in great need of reparations, for repaire whereof
the sayd Edward Thompson with the consent of the sayd Maurice
Thompson (whom this deponent often saw upon and aboard the sayd shipp
whilest she was in repairing) did Contract and agree with the sayd
Peter Pett both for Materials and workmanshipp And saith that the
sayd Peter Pett did according to the sayd Agreement furnish severall
naterialls and provisions whereof he was the lawfull owner and
Possessor to and for the repaire of the sayd shipp and therewith
the servants and Agents of the sayd Pett did substantially and workman=
like repaire the sayd shipp and fitt her for the sea of the sight
of this deponent who saw most of the materialls delivered aboard her
and made delivery of many of them aboard with his owne hands
and saw the same wrought and incorporated into the sayd shipp
and having now shewne and read to him a schedule to the sayd
Libell
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.596v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

[#] five hundred and
ninety pounds twelve
shillings six pence

[MARKE, LH MARGIN]

[ADD DATA]

William [MARKE] Bower
his marke [MARKE, RH MARGIN]

vid ad Interr.
A. 1.
----
The same day.

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Bud. dt.

3)

Nathaniel London of Ratcliffe shipwright
aged 23 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposetha nd saith as followeth
videlicet.

To the sayd Libell and severall Articles therein and schedule therein
mentioned This deponent saith that he was Apprentice to the sayd Peter
Pett in his life tyme and is att present a servant under his Relict
Elizabeth Pett the plaintiff, and thereby hath had often occasion to see and peruse
the bookes of Accompts of the sayd Peter Pett and therein hath seene
that the sayd Peter Pett did about September and some monethes
successively following in the yeare 1643 furnish severall materialls
and provisions to and for the repaire of the arlate shipp the Ruth
whereof the sayd Edward Thompson was then Master or Commander
and the sayd Maurice Thompson partowner...

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.597r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The seventh day of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]
The Clayme of the widdow of Nicholas)
Casseeres of Antwerp for two bags)
of sylver marked as in the margent)
and conteyning 320 pieces of eight)
Sivil and Mexico taken in the shipp)
the John Evangelist whereof John)
de Vos was master by some of the)
Parliament shipps. Smith. Budd)

Smith)
[?XXX]) dt. [?XXXX] infra.

John de Vos of Ostend in fflanders
Captaine or master of the sayd shipp the
Saint John Evangelist aged 48 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlcet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.597v Annotate
to be in the sayd shipp transported from Cadiz to Ostend or Dunkirke
and there delivered to Mr Jaques de Hoyes or his factor or deputy
to follow the order of the sayd widdow, which sayd baggs of sylver
or moneys this deponent receyved aboard his sayd shippp, And
thereupon with his owne hand firmed three bills of lading all
of one tenor for the same, one whereof the pperson who brought
the sayd bills to be signed left with this deponent to come along
with the sayd moneyses, and the two other he the sayd person tooke with him, and
saith that the bill of ladin to the sayd allegation annexed and now showne
him was and is one of the sayd two bills of lading, and that
the same was really signed by this deponent

[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. he saith he was master of the sayd shipp 3 yeares and upwards
and came first aboard att Serdam. and further saving as aforesaid he
cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.598r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The seventh day of ffebruary 1653.

The Clayme of William Webber Englishman)
for his goods in the shipp the Anne)
(whereof John Haines is master) taken)
by the shipp the Hopewell whreof John)
Bartlett is Captaine Smith ffranklin)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd William Webber

Rp.

Benjamin Arundel of ffalmouth
merchant aged 30. yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the 1 and 2 articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
William Webber Englishman whom this deponent hath well knowne
for these two yeares last past or thereabouts in the moneth of
November last past 1653. did lade on board the sayd shipp the
Anne whereof the sayd John Haynes then was master) then lyeing
att Brest - and bound for Waterford in Ireland, one pipe
of brandywine, one butt and one hogshead of vinegar, and 1/3 part of one
butt and of one pipe and of three hogsheads of white salt all without
markes for his owne Accompt to be in the sayd shipp transported
to Waterford aforesayd and there to be disposed of by him this deponent
(who went Supracargo in the sayd shipp) for the sole accompt
use and benefit of the sayd Webber, who gave expresse order
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.599r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The seventh day of ffebruary .1653.

The Clayme of Benjamin Arundell)
Englishman for his goods in the shipp
the Anne (whereof John Haynes is)
master) taken by the shipp the Hopewell)
whereof John Bartley is Captaine)
Smith ffrancklin)

Examined upon an allegation on the
behalfe of the sayd Benjamin Arundell.

Rp.

William Webber of the parish of Saint
Mary Magdalen Bermondsey in the County
of Surrey Mariner aged 34 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth, videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.600r Annotate
The seventh day of ffebruary 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of John dela Valette)
and others of Flanders for the shipp)
the Great Port of Dunkerke)
and the wynes and other goods)
in the same lately seized by)
the Hector and brought to)
Dartmouth. Suckley Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers.

Rp.

Matthias Mathewson of Dunkirke
in fflanders master of the sayd shipp the
Great Port aged 44 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that all and
singular the merchants goods now seized in the sayd shipp being
wines were laden aboard the sayd vessell the Great Port by
Peter Bosserode in the name of himself and Peter Coppens arlate
and by Govert Lammers, and by George Rozee arlate that is to say 
the sayd Peter Bosserode did
lade all the sayd wines and goods two parcells onely excepted; and
the sayd Lammers did lade on of the sayd two parcells and the
sayd Rozee the other which hee knoweth for that being master
of the sayd shipp he receyved the sayd wines and goods aboard his
sayd shipp neere Pombeuf in the river of Nantes of and from
the sayd persons respectively and their Barkeers by them imployed
respectively. And saith that the foresayd persons Peter Bosserode
Peter Coppens, Govert Lammers, and George Rozee were and are
all of them fflandrians and subiects of the King of Spaine
and for and as such commonly accounted, and that they  the sayd Bosserode Lammers and Rozee doe reside
att Nantes in the quality of ffactors and merchant strangers and
for and as such are there esteemed and reputed. And saith that
that the sayd Coppens when this deponent was last
att Dunkirke was then there and lodged in the howse of Mrs
Coppens a widdow there, videlicet att Dunkirke where this
deponent saw him in October last 1653 and beleiveth he is
still there, howbeit he saith that that
such parcells of wines as the sayd
Bosserode did lade he so laded by the name of Bosserode and
Coppens. and further referring himselfe to his bills
of lading in the Registry of this Court he cannot depose
saving that the sayd Bosserode Coppens Lammers and Rozee
are att Nantes observed to be ffactors of and for merchants
of fflanders, and so accounted.

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith the foresayd
shipp the Great Port was bound to Dunkerke onely and noe
other Port, and this deponent did receyve the sayd wines aboard to
be carryed thither and to noe other Port and accordingly signed
bills of lading for the same before hee came away from Nantes
in the howses of the respective Laders, and saith that all
the bills of lading found in the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure
were
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.600v Annotate
were the true reall and originall bills of lading and were
all and every of them signed by this deponent att Nantes before
his departure from thence, and saith that he this deponent did not
signe any other bills of lading of any other
tenor for the sayd goods, but was reallt without fraud or colour
to have delivered the sayd goods to the respective persons in the
sayd bills of lading mentioned for their respective accompts
And saith that before he came from Dunkerke Mr Peter
Lams of Dunkerke for whose accompt part of the sayd wines were
did give this deponent expresse order upon his returne from
Nantes with his lading to call att Dover and in his name to [?XX]
to Mr De la barr and Mr De laval or one of them to procure a
Convoy for Dunkerke, and that this deponent in case he
had not bene seized in the Downes was resolved to have gone
ith his sayd shipp to Dover to procure a Convoy according to the
order of the sayd Peter Lams to and for the preserving and
securing the sayd lading from the ffrench, that usually lyeth
off att sea in the Course for Dunkerke. And otherwise hee saith
he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the
arlate John de la Valette, Peter Lams Cornelio Thais Jaques
Goverts junior Michael Bloome the widdow of John de Coppins
Jasper and John le Clerke and Theodore Dowchet the [?XXX]
persons to whon the foresayd lading of wines is consigned were
and are all and every of them the sayd Doachet onely excepted
Inhabitants of Dunkerke, and the sayd Doachet was and is an
Inhabitant of Rissell or Lisle, and all and every of the sayd persons
were and are subiects of the King of Spaine, and such as
are generally observed and taken notice of to drive a [?Considerable]
trade to ffrance for wynes, having their factors there for
the better mannagement of the sayd trade, all which he this deponent
having bene a Constant Inhabitant in Dunkerke from his youth
and a sea fareing man hath well knwone seene and observed
And otherwise cannot depose.

To the last hee saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he was in September last past appoyneted mmaster of the sayd shipp att
Dunkerke (where he first came aboard her the 26th day of September
1653 last past

[ADD DATA]

To the .2. he saith he ws born at Berghe Saint Eunox in fflanders
about a league from Dunkerke, and saith that himselfe hath
together with his steersman 5 fatts and 1/2 of wine in the sayd [?shipp] and
that his shipps Company are nyne men and a boy, and are
all fflandrians the steersmn excepted, who is of fflushing
by birth, but hath for theise 6 monethes last past lived att
Dunkerke with his wife and Children. And further
otherwise than negatively he cannot depose saving
he this Rendent hath likewise one hogshead of vinegar aboard the aforesaid
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.601r Annotate
To the third hee saith that the wines and goods now seized are all
of the growth of ffrance.

To the fourth hee saw the sayd Bosserode att Nantes and the wines
laden by him in the name of Bosserode and Coppens, in his ware
howse att Nantes, and saw the rest of the wines in the warehowses
ofe Lammers and Rozee respectively but saith he saw not any of
the sayd wine bought nor any money payd for the same And
otherwise cannot depose saving his foregoeing depositions.

To the 5th he saith the sayd shipp began her outwards voyage
from Dunkerke in her ballast and saith that the sayd goods were
all laden by the Laders named in the bills of lading as in
his foregoeing deposition he hath sett forth and by noe other
and further cannot depose, saving that he did not bring
any goods or money from Dunkerke to ffrance.

To the 6th hee saith he doth not know to what Port the sayd shipp
did belong 12 monethes agoe nor who were then owners of
her. and further cannot depose.

To the .7th he saith that he knoweth well all the persons interrate
named in the third article of the sayd allegation the foresayd Douchet
excepted whose person he never saw but by reputation knoweth him
to be a merchant Inhabitant of Rissell, and saith he knoweth
not what goods o moneyes any of the sayd persons have
here to fore sent into ffrance. And further or otherwise he
cannpt depose.

matheus mahmissen [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before the three Judges in Court.
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Rp.

2)

John ffrancois of Lisle or Rissell in fflanders
merchant aged 30 yeares or thereabouts a
witnesse sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the
arlate Peter Bosserode Peter Coppens, Govert Lammerss and
George Rozee resident att Nantes are by birth all of them
fflandrians and so accounted and reside att Nantes as factors
and merchants strangers onely and are subiects of the
King of Spaine and so accounted, and are such persons as
have mannaged and att present doe mannage factories att Nantes
for the accompt of fflandrians, and further saith
that the sayd Bosserode and Coppens are partners in one and the
same factory and doe mannage their busines in Company
and partnershipp and so are commonly observed to doe, and saith
tht he this deponent about a month agoe saw and dranke with
the sayd Peter Coppens att Dunkerke and then understood by
him that he had bene there severall monethes. and saith that
it is an usuall thing for factors that are in partnershipp together
to enter both their names in bills of lading and accompt and
other
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.601v Annotate
other writings that concerne their common factory though one of
them be absent, and so much this deponent hath often tymes observed
to be practised by the sayd Bosserode and Coppens. and knoweth
the premisses for that he is a merchant of Lisle or Rissell in
fflanders and there hath lived all his tyme and for theis three
yeares last past hath had and has constant correspondency with the arlate
George Rozee, and for theis 12 monethes last past hath had
constant correspondency with the said Bosserode and Coppens
and knoweth that the sayd Lammers foth mannage factoryes for severall
merchants of Lisle the particularl freinds and acquaintances of him
this deponent. and further cannot depose.

To the 2 hee saith hee cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that hee knoweth
well the arlate John de la Valette, Peter Lams, Jaques Goverts
junior Michael Bloome the widdow of John de Coppens, Jasper [?XXX
John le Clerke and Theodore Dorichet, and saith that all the sayd
persons are fflandrians and subiects of the King of Spaine and so
accounted, and that the sayd Douchet is a merchant inhanitant of
Rissell and all the others were are Iinhabitants of Dunkerke
as drive a Constant trade from fflander to ffrance for ffrench
wines and other goods, for their owne accompt and for such have bene by this deponent
and others commonly accounted and observed. And further hee
cannot depose

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the .1. he saith he hath credibly heard that the sayd mothaison was made
master of the sayd shipp the Great Port in the place of one Govert
Sanarell of Dunkerke deceased, and further cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the 7th hee referreth himselfe to his foregoeing depositions
and otherwise or further cannot depose, saving that he knoweth
not Cornelio Thuys:/

J François [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.602r Annotate
The tenth day of ffebruary .1653.

On the behalfe of Richard Bromwell)
and Company touching the losse)
of the Mary Bonadventure.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Clements dt.

3

Richard Bromwell of Ipswich in Suffolke Marinner
Captaine or Master of the sayd shipp the Marie
Bonadventure aged 37 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

To the .1 and 2 articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in
the yeares 1652 and all and every the monethes therein and
particularly in April May June July August September October
November December January and ffebruary 1652 and for many
yeares before and continually since he this deponent and Company
to say Major Thomas Chamberlin John Smith Peter Talbot
Beniamin Harrison, Jeremy Cole, Edmund
Gibson John Harrison and others
all English men were and att presnt are or ought to be the
the (sic) lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the arlate shipp the Mary
Bonadventure and of her tackle apparell munition and furniture
and for such were and are accounted, having built the same in the
yeare 1643. and having continued in the quiet possession
of her ever sithence till the seizure hereafter sett forth. And
further saith that about the Month of Aprill 1652. the sayd shipp
under Conduct of this deponent was by the sayd Owners imployed
out to sea for a lading of east Countrey Commodityes to returne
with the same for this Port of London. and accordingly did in
persuance of the sayd voyage arrive safely att Dantzick about
the end of May 1652. and att Quuinsborough in June next following
and there tooke in her lading now in question and therewith in or about the month
of August then next ensueing arrived safely att Copen hagen
in Denmarke under the Conduct of this deponent who went and
was master of her, and thereby knoweth the premisses to be true
And otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the
arrivall of the sayd shipp att or neere Quinsborough and in the monthe
of June 1652. Hee this deponent as master of the sayd
shipp and factor forhimselfe and Mr Smith and Beniamin Harrison aforesaid two of his Common Owners did with their moneyes and for his owne and their
accompt att Quinborough buy procure and
lade aboard the sayd shipps (sic), the severall goods hereafter particu
larly named, which were really worth and in England would
have yeilded as this deponent conceyveth the severall rates prices or summes of sterling money
hereafter likewise particularly specifyed that is to say xij
Bundles of Rine hemp poiz 151 lb weight att xxxiiij s per Quarter
is 307 li 14 s sterling. And Cxx small bundles of hemp of
[?Poulavis] att xx s per peice is 50 li. And 6 C of Clapboard
att 6 li per C is .36 li sterling and one hundred of great Clapboards
worth
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.602v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

And that the Mariners
of the sayd shipps Companie being about .18. persons had an
Adventure in goods and merchandizes aboard the sayd shipp
of the value of .450. li sterling as this deponent beleiveth for their Accompy And saith that all
and singular the foresayd gods merchandizes and Cloathes were
laden and putt on board the sayd shipp in or about the tyme
aforesayd to be from Quinsborough transported to this port
of London. for the respective accompts aforesayd

[ADD DATA]

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
shipp the Mary Bonadventure was an able and staunch and
well built shipp, and of or about the burthen of 340 tonnes
with 16 gunnes. and was with her tackle apparell and
furniture and gunnes  well worth the summe of 2400 li of
lawfull moneyes of England and for a lesse summe this deponent
would not sell the same. And further cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.603r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The tenth day of ffebruary 1653.

On behalfe of his Highnes the Lord)
Protector of the Commonwealth of England)
Scotland and Ireland and the Dominions
thereunto belonging against John)
Pibus. Budd)

Examined upon Articles given and admitted
on behalfe of the Lord Protector.

Rowe dt.

1

Adam Butler of Wapping in the County
of Middlesex Blacksmith and Citizen of London
late one of the Company of the shipp Martha
whereof John Pibus was Master
aged 36 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

To the .1. article This deponent saith that it is notorious that for
theis sixteenth monethes last past and upwards there was and is open
and publique warr and hostility att sea betweene this Commonwealth
and the States of the United Provinces and their respective subiects; and
that there have bene mutuall seizures of shipps and goods at sea on both
parts and that there are rightfull and universall reprisalls granted
by the authority of this Commonwealth for the seizng of the shipps and
goods of the sayd States abd their subiects for reparation of dammages
susteyned by the English Nation through the violences done against
them by the sayd States and their subiects And somuch the sayd John
Pibus did and doth knowe and hath acknowledged and declared
somuch or to the like effect in the hearing of this deponent. And further
he saith he cannot depose.

To the 2. 3. and 4th articles he refrreth himselfe to the Law and
Customes of this Commonwealth and otherwise cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.604r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

Adam 'a' Butler
his marke
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd articles

Rowe dt.

2

'Edward Bunne' of King street in the parish
of Stepney and County of Middlesex Labourer, late of of
the Company of the Martha John Pibus master aged
35 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.604v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 11th day of ffebruary 1653

The Clayme of the widdow of Nicholas)
Cassieres for her moneyes in the)
Saint John Evangelist)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

dt. Smith.

2)

Wynant fflengells of Dunkerke in
fflanders Mariner Purser of the sayd shipp
the Saint John Evangelist aged 31 yeares a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article if the sayd allegation this deponent saith that neing a native
o Antwerpe and there having lived a great part of his tyme
he knoweth well the arlate widdoe of Nicholas Cassares and
so hath done for theis 20 yeares last past, and knew well the sayd
Nicholas in his life tyme who hath now bene dead about 4 or 6 yeares
And saith that the sayd Nicholas in his liefe and his widdow since his
death did drive a Constant trade from Antwerpe the place of their
dwelling to Malaga Sevelia dn Cadiz in Spaine for sylver
and other goods, and had and now the sayd widdow hath factors
Agents and Correspondents att and in the sayd ports and places
in Spaine to and for the better mannaging of the sayd trade, and
so much this deponent having bene formerly an Inhabitant of
Antwerpe
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.605v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The eleaventh day of ffebruary /1653.

The Clayme of Martin Tyson Ankerhelme)
Admirall of Gottenbergh, Israel Norens)
President of Gottenbergh and others of)
Gottenbergh Subiects of the Queene of)
Sweden for the shipp Charity of which)
Paul Paulson is master and the goods)
in the same being pitch tarr iron and)
other goods lately in fact seized by)
the Restitution sett out by a private)
Man of Warr and brought to Dover)
Suckly Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of 
the sayd Claymers:-

Swad. Secret dt.

Paulus Paulson of Gottenbergh
Master of the sayd shipp the Charity
aged 37 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that about three
yeares now past the arlate Martin Tyson Israel Norens and
others all of Gottenbergh did att Gottenbergh att thwir owne Costs and
Charges and for their owne use cause the sayd shipp the CHaritie
to be built att Gotenbergh , and ever since the sayd shipp was soe
built she hath belonged and doth att present belong to the sayd Port
of Gottenburgh, and for all the sayd tyme the foresayd Martin TYson
Israel Norens and Company have bene and att present are the
lawfull Owners and Proprietors of the sayd shipp her tackle apparrell
and furniture, the premisses he knoweth for that he hath belonged
to the sayd shipp from her first building to the present first as steersman
and afterwards as master of her, And further cannot depose
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.606r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponents aith that the arlate
shipp the Charitas or Charitie set sayle from Gottenburgh in
Company of seveb other Gottenburgh shipps all laden with the like
goods wherewith the Charity is laden, five whereof were bound for Lisboa
And saith that all the sayd sevenb vessells with their lading respectively
are come voluntarily into this Commonwealth that is to say four of
them to Portsmouth and three to this Port of London, which he knoweth
having lately seene and spoken with the 7 skippers of the sayd seven shipps hereatt London
and otherwise he cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the saud allegation This deponent saith That he this
deponent being Paul Paulson the master of the sayd shipp Charity arlate
is a native of Stettyn in Pomerland and a subiect of the queene of
Sweden and is a Citizen and Burgher of Gottenburgh and so
hath bene for theis two yeares now last past, and was two yeares
agoe solemnly admitted  and sworne a Burgher of the sayd Citty
in the Stadt howse thereby before the Magestrates of the sayd Citty
And saith that he hath a wife living att Exwick in Holland
but hath not bene in Holland theis three yeares now last past
and seene his wife in all that tyme And further cannot depose.

To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd vessell
the Charity had not any other Colours buy the Swedish onely during this
voyage from Gottenburgh as aforesayd.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.606v Annotate
To the Crosse Interrogatories

Smith dt.

To the 1. he saith he comes to testify the truth in this Cause by the
meanes of the Secretary to the Swedish Resident and hath neither any
part in the sayd shipp nor any share or Interest in any of the lading
of the sayd shipp six barrells of tarr excepted. And further
cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the fourth he saith that he this Rendent doth now inhabite att Gottenbergh
and so hath done for theis two yeares last past, and saith he hath a wife
and children who all live att Exwick aforesayd and this deponent two
yeares agoe came from thence and since hath not bene there. and saith
he is a Burgher of Gottenburgh and is for the most part att sea
trading to and againe and when he is att Gottenburgh lodgeth
and eateth att the howse of the sayd Martyn Tyson Admirall of
Gottenburgh and the reason of his living there was not nor is not
the securing of his goods from the English for as much as he came
to live there and yeare and halfe before any difference happened
betwixt England and Holland, but because his shipp whereof
he is master which is his livelyhood belongs to that port of Gottenburgh
and for that he was made and admittde a Burgher there neere
halfe a yeare before the late troubles betwixt England and Holland
began. And otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

To the fifth he saith he was att Stetin as aforesayd and his shipps
Company are 13 persons in all three whereof are Hollander, one
an Hamburgher and the rest all Swedes. And saith there doth
belong to the sayd shipps Company avout 30 barrells of tarr And
further saving as aforesayd he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.607r Annotate
yeares with his wife Children and family and for ten yeares last past
hath bene and is Admirall of Gottenbergh and so accounted and
was and is a subiect of the Queene of Swedland. And this deponent
knoweth that the foresayd persons are Owners of the sayd lading for theis
reasons followeing. videlicet eighty shipp pound of Iron. because he
saw the sayd Iron in the possession of the foresayd persons respectively before
the same was laden according tp their respective proportionable shares
in the sayd shipp, and assisted att the carrying of the same from
the warehowses wherein it was layd to the shipp. but saith he saw
not the sayd Iron bought nor any money payd for the same. and knoweth
that they are owners of the sayd tarr. being nyne lasts
and sayd pitch being five lasts because he this deponent did for
them and with their money from them receyved according to their
sayd respective proportionable shares in the sayd shipp buy the same
to say the sayd tarr of Martin Dryer of Gottenburgh and paid
to him for the same 297 Rix dollars in Swedish coyne. and
the sayd Pitch of Jurian Van Laugen and Hans Jurian of
Gottenburgh for 255. Rix dollers. and
the sayd Vendors being two of the shipps Owners did putt the same
to the Common accompt of themselves and other their fellow Owners
att the sayd price: but this deponent saw not the money payd for the same
and knoweth that the foresayd persons are Owners of the sayd
deales being 4000. deales and two masts because he this deponent
on behalfe of his sayd Common Owners bought the sayd deales of Nillis Burson
one of the Owners videlicet the sayd deales att 12 Ryx dollers per hundred
which moneyes he this deponent did pay to the sayd Burson
in Swedish Coyne (the sayd Bursons owne proportionable share
therein onley excepted) which he receaved of the sayd Owners according
to their like shares as aforesayd, and this deponent bought the
two masts of Gerdt Peterson and payd to him for  the same
with money receaved from his common Owners according as to their sayd
shares 15 Rix follars in Swedish Coyne.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.607v Annotate
The fourteenth day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2)

Jacob Janson of Amsterdam in Holland mariner
Steersman of the sayd shipp the Charity aged [?5X]
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

before, but had bene att sea too and againe betwixt Portugall
and Gottenbergh, and since that tyme he the sayd Paulson hath not bene
in Holland of the certaine knowledge of this deponent, who for all the
sayd tyme hath sayled alongside him sometyme in his said shipp the
Charity and sometymes in another shipp of Gottenbergh sayleing
in Company with the sayd shipp Charity And otherwise he cannot
depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.608r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. hee saith he comes to testify his knowledge in this Cause att the
Request of the sayd skipper Paulson, and saith he hath 6 barrells of tarr
aboard the sayd shipp and otherwise negatively.

and in the yeare 1652
the sayd Paulson was masde Master of the Charaity and this REndent became
his steersman and sayled with him in the Charity to Lisboa, and
returned with him from thence to Gottenbergh in the same yeare
and in the yeare 1653. this deponent shipped himselfe steersman
of the John of Gottenbergh Peter Paulson master and the Charity Paul
Paulson  interrate master sett out for Gottenbergh with the John but
being bound for Lisboa shaped her Course thither, and the John came
to this Port of London and here unladed her goods and sayled
from thence to Lisboa after the Charity, but when the John came
there this Rendent heard that the Charity was gone from thence with
a lading of salt to Gottenburgh, whether when the John came which
was in the moneth of August this Rendent found the Charity and sayd
Paulson there and in or about the beginning of January last
this Rendent shipped himselfe steersman of the sayd shipp Charity
and was after the seizure brought to Dover where the sayd shipp
Charity now lyeth. And further saving his forgoeing depositions
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.608v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 6th. hee saith that he this Rendent bought his sayd 6 barrels
of Tarr att Gottenbergh in December last past of Hans Young
a Scotchman and payd for the same 16. Rix dollars Swedish Coyne
and saith he saw the sayd skippe Poulson att Gottenbergh in the
sayd moneth come out of the howse of Admirall Tyson of Gottenbergh
aforesayd with a bagg of money under his Arme which he then sayd
was to be payd for part of the Charityes lading but this Rendent saw
not him pay the same nor knoweth to whom he payd the same. And otherwise
he saith he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 15th day of ffebruary 1653

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Anthony Woolward and Company

Clements dt.

3)

Michael Russell of Shadwell in the County 
of Surrey (sic) Mariner late Masters mate of the sayd
shipp the Elizabeth and Mary aged 38 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth, videlicet.


HCA 13/68 f.609r Annotate
To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
monthes of May June July August September October November
december January and february 1652 Captaine John [?Hunter] Roger
Coleman, Mr Cole, Anthony Woolward and Company all
Englishmen and subiects of this Commonwealth were Owners of the
arlate shipp the Elizabeth and Mary and so accounted, and the
sayd Anthony Woolward for and during all the sayd tyme was Master
of her and within the sayd tyme was likewise Owner and still ought
to be of part of her lading, as allso the foresayd Owners ought to be
of the sayd shipp and her tackle and furniture. And otherwise he
saith he cannot depose saving that he was Masters Mate of the sayd shipp the sayd voyage
in question.

To the second and third articles of the sayd allegation. This deponent saith That
the sayd shipp Elizabeth and Mary being bound into the Baltick sea
to returne for London with East Countrey goods sett sayle from
London under the Commannd of the sayd Woollward as Master of her
about the end of Aprill 1652. and in her way
touching att Harwich departed from thence the beginning of May
1652 . and about the latter end of May arrived att dantzyck
and there made Livery of her outward lading and about
the latter end of June 1652 came to Riga. and then and
there the sayd Anthony Woolward did for his owne accompt
bu and lade on board the sayd shipp the severall parcells of
goods hereafter mentioned which were worth and would then
have yeilded in this Citty of London the severall and respective
prices or values hereafter deduced all to be transported
to London for his owne accompt. that is to say three lasts of
hempe worth 36 s per hundred, amounting to 108. li sterling. three
lasts of flax, worth about 50. s per hundred amounting to 150 li
sterling. eleven hundred of Clapboard or thereabouts worth 6 li
per hundred. thirty Rough Oares worth about 3 or 4 s. a peice. And
about 1500 pipe [?partes] of good value. And over and above the
premisses the Mariners of the sayd shipp being about 28 persons
had an adventure on board the sayd shipp for their accompt to the value of about
300. li sterling not accounting any thing for this deponents adventure
which being but a few cases of bottles and other small things of
little value he doth not affirmat. And saith that the foresayd Mariners
Chests bedding Clothes and Instruments on board the sayd shipp
were worth about 150. li sterling. this deponents owne Cloathes
Instruments and necesaries all which he lost on board the sayd shipp
by th meanes hereafter sett forth amounting to the value of
15. li sterling. And saith all the sayd goods Cloathes and necessaries were
in the sayd shipp to have bene transported to London and here to
be delivered for the Accompts aforesayd respectively. and the sayd
shipp and goods arrived safely att Copenhagen in Augst 1652. together
with this deponent on board her who being Masters mate of the sayd shipp saw
all the sayd goods laden as aforsayd. And further he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.610r Annotate
B.5.

The 20th day of ffebruary 1653.

A Busines of Examination of Witnesses)
on the part and behalfe of Mathew)
Southwell and Company Owners of)
the shipp the Satisfaction whereof the)
sayd Mathew Southwell was master)
being Owners and Laders of the sayd)
shipp or a great part thereof which)
shipp and lading was seized by)
the King of Denmarke or his Ministers)
within that Kingdome. Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Owners

Clements dt.

1

Philip Noyes of Wapping in the County
of Middlesex Mariner aged 34 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1. 2. and 3. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
being in June 1652 att Dantzyck with his shipp the Plough of
London he then and there saw the arlate Mathew Southwell in the
wuiet possession of the arlate shipp the Satisfaction as master and sole
Owner of her and then and there heard aswell himselfe as others
say that he the sayd Southwell had lately bought the sayd shipp with
her tackle and furniture there for ready money for his  owne sole
use and accompt. And saith the sayd shipp Satisfaction sayled in
Company of this deponents shipp from dantzick towards Riga
in the sayd moneth of June 1652. and then and there the sayd Southwell
did buy provide and lade on board his sayd shipp Satisfaction for his
owne use and accompt to be transported to London the goods
hereafter mentioned many of which this deponent saw him really [?prXXX]
for att Riga and saw them all laden, woch were worth and
would have yeilded in England the respective prices as followeth
to say 29 'C' of Clapboard worth 6 li per 'C' being 179 li sterling
forty wainscotts worth 25 s a peice being in all 50 li serling
and 12 spruce deales worth 6 s a peice being 3 li. 12 s
and beleiveth that the sayd Southwell had Cloathes Instruments
and necessaryes of good value aboard the sayd shipp, and that the
Mariners had likewise a Considerable Adventure aboard
besides their Cloathes all which were lost by the seizure hereafter
mentioned which was made att Copenhagen to which place the
sayd shipp Satisfaction as also this deponents shipp did safely
arrive in August 1652. And otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.610v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 20th day of ffebruary 1653

A busines of Examination of Witnesses)
on the part and behalfe of Phillip Noyes)
sand Company Owners of the shipp the)
Plough whereof the sayd Philip was)
master being Owners and Laders of the)
sayd shipp or a great part thereof which)
shipp and lading was seized by the)
King of Denmarke or his Ministers)
within that Kingdome Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Owners

Philip Noyes of Wapping in the
County of Middlesex Mariner late Master of
the sayd shpp the Plough aged 34
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.611v Annotate
The 21st day of ffebruary 1653.

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2

Richard Mascall of Wapping in the County of
Middlesex Mariner late Masters mate of the shipp the
Plough aged 49 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet.

To the first second and third Articles This deponent saith that for all the tyme
arlate the sayd Philip Noyes and Company all English men were
Owners of the sayd shipp the Plough and so are att present, and that
the sayd shipp in the yeare 1652 being bound into the East Countrey
the sayd Philip Noyes went Master of her and that in pursuance of the
sad voyage the sayd shipp came safely to Dantzyck in May 1652
and about the end of the same month to Riga and that there in or about
the month of June 1652 the sayd Phillip Noyse did buy and for his
owne accompt lade aboard the sayd shipp two last and eight [?LipXXX]
of fflax worth 103 li (valewing the sayd goods att the rate they were att
that tyme sold for in London) on last and 1/2 of hempe worth 51 li
seven long deales worth 2 li 9 s 13 'C' and 1/2 of Clapboard worth
81 li and 12 C of pipestaves worth 14 li 8 s and that the sayd Noyse
and his Mariners had Cloathes bedding bookes necessaries and
Instruments aboard the sayd shipp worth 100 li sterling over and besides
three wainscotts worth 30 s which this deponent had on board the sayd
shipp for his owne accompt, All whch goods and other things were in the sayd shipp to
be from Riga transported to London for the accompt and use of the
sayd Phillipp Noyes and his mariners according to their respective
Interest, And saith that the sayd goods being soe laden the shipp Plough
sett sayle from Riga and in August 1652. came safely with the said
goods in her to Copenhagen in Denmarke, all which he knoweth
for that he was masters mate of the sayd shipp the voyage in question
and saw the sayd goods laden, and the premisses so had and done as
aforesayd. And otherwise cannot depose

To the fourth fifth and sixth articles of the sayd allegation he saith that the
sayd shipp Plough was a staunch and well built shipp and of the burthen
of 100 last and upwards, (she having the sayd voyage from Riga [?101]
last of merchants goods on board her over and besides the goods aforesayd
and had 12 gunnes and furniture and tackle and munition requisite
and was worth in this deponents judgement the summe of 1400 li
sterling or thereabouts with her gunnes and appurtenances. and saith
that the shipp continueing att Copenhagen till September 1652
was then embargoed or stayd by authority of the King of Denmarke
and there deteyned till ffebruary 1652. and was then with [?XXX]
goods Clothes bedding Instruments and things aforesaid absolutely seized
in to the hands of the sayd King by his officers by meanes whereof not
onely the foresayd goods Clothes and other things are become lost to the
true Owners thereof, but allso severall other dammages to a great
value of 123 li sterling or thereabouts, and losse of the sayd shipps
ymployment to the value of 70 li per month over and besides the losse of
tyme and expenses in travayle fyr England of Master and Mariners to the
value of [?300] li or thereabouts And otherwise cannot depose

richard [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.612r Annotate
The 22th day of ffebruarie 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

3)

John Upson of Redriffe in the County of Surrey
Mariner aged 48 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the sayd allegation and the severall articles thereof this deponent saith
that for and dureing the tyme arlate Philip Noyes and Company
were Owners of the sayd shipp the Plough and so accounted, and that
the sayd shipp under the Commaund of the sayd Philip Noyes as master of her
(of the sight of this deponent who was Masters mate of the shipp Satisfaction
then lyeing att Riga) did in the moneth of June 1652 arrive safely
att the sayd Port of Riga, and then and there the sayd Philip Noyse did
buy and for his owne accompt lade on bard the sayd shipp Plough
two last and eight lips pound of flax worth 3 li sterling per hundred
or thereabouts and one last and an halfe of hempe worth about
36 s per hundred and seven long deales worth .7. s a peice, and
thirteene hundred and an halfe of Clapboard worth .6. li per hundred
and 12 hundred pipestaves the value whereof he certainly knoweth
not. and that the Chests Cloathes and Instruments of the sayd Noyes
and his shipps Company aboard the sayd shipp Plough were well worth
80. li sterling and upwards and that the sayd shipp the Plough was with
her foresayd goods bound for the Port of London here to discharge
and having taken in her sayd gooods sayled in Company of the sayd shipp
Satisfaction to Copenhagen in denmarke and there arrived safely
in August 1652. and continued there till September 1652 att which
tyme she was stayed from proceeding for London by the rder of the
King of denmarke and there deteyned till ffebruary 1652
and was then absolutely seized into the hands of the sayd King. by means
whereof the sayd shipp (which was an able shipp of 120 lasts and 12
gunnes and was worth in the Judgment of this deponent 1500 li sterling.)
and goods Cloathes and other things are become lost to the true
Owners thereof who have besides the losse of their sayd shipp and goods by
the meanes of the sayd seizure and detention suffered other great
dammages videlicet the sayd Noyes and Company 55. s or thereabouts
per last of all the sayd shipps lading of merchants goods the voyage and
in want of ymployment of the sayd shipp (the dammages being so cast upp)
80 li per moneth or thereabouts. And the sayd Noyes and his Mariners
over and besides the foresayd dammages in losse of tyme and expenses
have susteyned losse and dammage to the summe of 100 li sterling att the
least And saith he knoweth the premisses because he saw a good part of
the syd goods bought and all of them laden att Riga and sayled in Company
of the Plough in the sayd shipp the Satisfaction from Riga to Copenhagen
where the sayd detention and seizure were made as aforesaid And further
he saith he cannot depose.

John [?Upsonn] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.612v Annotate
The 22nd day of ffebruary 1653

On the behalfe of Mathew Southwell)
and Company touching the losse of)
the shipp Satisfaction. ad. p.r. m.)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

'John Upson' of Redriffe in the County of
Surrey Mariner late Masters mate of  the
sayd shipp Satisfaction, aged 48 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.613r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

John Upsonn [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontests)
in both the sayd Causes)
----
The 22th day of ffebruary 1653.

A Busines of Examination of Wittnesses)
on the part and behalfe of John Upton)
and Company ffreighters of all)
or a great part of the lading aboard)
the ship called the Mary Anne of)
Alborough whereof William Bixley)
was Master seized by the King of)
DEenmarke or his Ministers Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd John Upton and Company

1 m 9

Clements dt

Peter Knight of Ratcliffe in the County
of Middlesex Mariner late Pilot of the
sayd shipp the Mary Ann of Alborough aged
62 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet/

To the first second third fourth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation This
deponent saith That in the month of March 1652 the arlate
Shipp the Mary Ann of Alborough under Conduct of the sayd
William Bixley as Master of her and this deponent as Pilot did
depart from this Port of London upon a voyage to Riga in Leifland
and back againe to London, and that in June 1652. the foresayd
shipp under the same Conduct arrived safely att Riga, and then
and there the factor of the arlate John Upton did of the certaine
knowledge observation and sight of this deponent lade on
board
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.613v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 22th day of february 1653

A Busines of Examination of Witnesses)
on the part and behalfe of William)
Bigsly and Company Owners of the)
shipp the Mary Ann whereof the sayd)
William Bigsley was Master being)
Owners of the sayd shipp and Laders)
of some part thereof which sayd)
shipp was seized by the King of)
Denmarke or his Ministers in that)
Kingdome. Clements)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd William Bigsly and Company

1 m 9

Clements dt.

Peter Knight of Ratcliffe
in the County of Middlesex Mariner late
Pilot of the shipp Mary Anne
aged 62 yeares or therabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.614r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the fourth fifth and sixtha rticles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith That the foresayd shipp the Mary Ann was an able shipp
and well provided of the burthen of 130 last with ten
gunnes, and saith that comeing to Copenhagen with her sayd goods
in August as aforesayd she continued there till September 1652
and was then imbarged, under which imbargo she was deteyned by
Order of the King of Denmarke till february 1652. in which
moneth and yeare the sayd King of Denmarke of the sight of this deponent
did by his officers forcibly seize the sayd shipp and the foresayd
lading of goods Cloathes and other things and dispossest the sayd
Bigsly and his Company thereof by meanes whereof the sayd
shipp and goods became utterly lost to the sayd Owners who
over and besides the foresayd loss (the value whereof he cannot
estimate not knoweing as he saith the value of the sayd shipp
and goods) have systeyned other great dammages in losse of
the sayd shipps freight the sayd voyage and in losse of her ymployment
as allso the sayd Master and mariners in their losse of tyme the
balue whereof he cannot sett forth.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.614v Annotate
The 24th day of ffebruary 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of Samuelle Palache)
alias Jacob Carlus)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3us

David Ben Mordecay of Morocco in Barberry
Merchant aged 40 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and 
saith as followeth videlicet.

[?XXX] dt.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
monthes of September October November December and January
1653 last past the arlate Samuel Palache
alias Jacob Carolus was and att present ought to be and is the
Lawfull Owner and proprietor of all and singular the goods
wares merchandizes and Jewells mentioned and expressed
in the Schedule arlate, that is to say of 3 dry fatts with
bookes Cloathes kettles and other houshold stuffe and Instruments
of houshold marked as in the margent. and allso of five

[FIRST MARKE, LH MARGIN]

trunkes or Coffers two large and three small with Cloathes
wearing apparell wrought plate for ordinary use and
other goods in the same. and allso of one large Case with
linnen being in all about 76. peices of linnen and other
goods marked as aforesayd and of one box of Jewells of
severall sorts. the premisses he knoweth to be true for that in
or about the month of September last past the tyme otherwise
present he remembreth not hee saw the foresayd bookes (and
houshold stuffe and Cloathes in the howse of the sayd Palache
att Hamburgh and there saw the saime putt up into the sayd
fatts and [?hraakes]. and then and there saw the sayd box of
Jewells in his possession which he afterwards opened in this
deponents presence and shewed severall sorts of Jewells that were
therein to him this deponent who was present with the sayd
Palache att Hamburgh in or about the moneth of September
aforesayd and then and there saw him buy for ready money and
for his owne use the foresayd 76 peices of linnen, and a ffreind
saw the same made up in the foresayd case. and heard the sayd
Samuel Palache then and there saye and affirme that the foresayd
goods linnen plate and Jewells were his owne and that he did
intend to carry them along with him to Rochell in ffrance whither
he was then designed and intended to goe. And otherwise
he saith he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that 
in or about the sayd month of September 1653 last past he this
deponent being then att Hamborough and in the howse of the sayd
Palache saw the foresayd fatts trunkes case and box having in his
the goods linnen plate and Jewells aforesayd carryed
out of his howse to the water side and putt in a boate or barke and the
sayd Palache accompanyed with this deponent
went along with the same himselfe in the sayd boat or barke
to the shipps side whereon they were to be laden then 
lying neare the Port of Hamburgh. and there this deponent
did see the sayd Samuell Palache lade on board the sayd shipp
the Prophet Elias Simon Jacobson Prophet Master all and
singular
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.616r Annotate
The second day of March 1653.

On behalfe of the Lord Protector)
against John Pibus.)

Examined upon the sayd Articles

5 t 9

Row dt.

Thomas Hoane of East Greenwich in the County
of Kent Mariner late one of the Company of the
shipp Martha whereof John Pibus was master, aged
39 yeares or therabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth, videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.617r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

the marke of
Thomas 'IH' Hoane.
----
The third day of March 1653.

Information given in)
upon Oath in the High Court)
of Admiralty touching)
[?XXX] Carey Captaine of a Private)
Man of warr now lyeing neer)
[?Dover], and his Company, belonging)
to the sayd shipp of warr)

Cornelius Johnson of Straelsondt in
Pomeren Mariner Master of the shipp
ffortune belonging to the port of Stralsond
aged 40 yeares or thereabouts
sworne
in Court (as by the Acts of Court appeareth), saith
and deposeth by vertue of his Oath as followeth
videlicet.

That the foresayd shipp the ffortune  of Stralsond being upon
her cCourse from Nantes in ffrance to Hamburgh with her present
ladinge of wynes and goods on board her under Conduct of this
deponent as Master of her was seized by a frigot of this Commonwealth
and brought to Plymouth about eleven weekes since. And
that upon hearing of the sayd matter touching the seizure of the
sayd shipp in this Court, a Restitution thereof was decreed, which
this deponent procured to be exemplifyed and authenticated
under
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.617v Annotate
under the Greate Seale of this Court,a nd carryed the same
with him to Plimouth where he had the possession of his sayd shipp
the ffortune and her lading delivered to him, And saith that
on or about the 21th or 22th day of ffebruary 1653 last past
he sett saile with his sayd shipp and goods from Plymouth and tooke
to sea with him the Exemplification of his Restitution  so sealed as
aforesayd,a nd that after he had bene att sea two dayes upon his
Course for Hamburgh all along the English Coast about 6.
leagues from Dover the foresayd Captaien carey and Company
in their shipp being a private man of warr mett with this
deponent and hald him demanding of this deponent whence
he was and whither bound whereto this deponent replyed that
he was of Stralsond and was goeing to Hamburgh, and upon
the neerer approach of the sayd private man of warr and boarding
of the sayd shipp ffortune (but before actuall boarding) this
deponent did declare to the sayd Captaine carey (who is by common
repute an Irish man) that he this deponent had bene formerly
seized as aforesaid and that the sayd shipp ffortune and her lading had bene upon legall processe duly
restored by Authority of the Admiralty Court of England, and
then this deponent produced his foresayd Exemplification and
shewed the sayd carey the seale thereof being the great
seale of this Court But the sayd Carey the premisses notwithstanding
would and did board this deponent and sayd he cared not for the
sayd seale nor for any of the Contents of the writing under the
same, And saith that so soone as the sayd Carey and Company
of his sayd man of warr did board the fortune aforesayd his the
sayd Careyes men without anbt offence to them offered or cause
given did beat this deponents shipps Company with their swords
in the sight of this deponent, And soone after this deponent and
4 of his Company were taken into and carryed on board the sayd
Man of warr and then and there this deponent delivered to the
sayd Carey his bookes papers and writings, and amongst the rest
the forementioned examplification under seale as aforesayd, which the
sayd Carey did read and sayd he mattered it not nor cared for it
and that the sayd decree so exemplifyed notwithstandinge he
would make the sayd shipp ffortune prize and carry her to Dover
with her lading. And saith att the sayd tyme upon boarding of the
ffortune the sayd Careyes men did with their swords cutt in peices
much of the tackle and ropes of the sayd shipp ffortune, And having
soe done and being become Masters of her did by order of the
sayd Carey carry her to Dover where she now is with her lading being
wynes praens and ginger in the possession of the sayd Carew
or his Agents. And saith that upon the sayd Carrey bringing
this deponent and his Company to Dover he turned all this
deponents people out of the shipp ffortune and sent and kept them
as Prisoners in private howses in Dover 2 and 2 in an howse
and kept this deponent for five dayes together alone as a
prisoner in a private howse there, and debarred him the use of
pen Inke and paper and all meanes whereby he might make
his case knowne, and in that case had kept this deponent to
this tyme
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.618r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 8th day of March 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

[?Q] James Pinquett for 18 bales)
of linnen. taken by Captaine)
Badily out of the Nightingale)
Smith Bud)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

[?XXX] 1um Teste in fine libri B.10

2d9

George Boschaert of Antwerpe
merchant sworne and examined sdeposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first Article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
James Pinquet is a merchant of Antwerpe and well knowne to this deponent
and was and is a fflandrian borne and so accounted and for many
yeeres now last past hath lived in Antwerpe and for three yeares
of the certaine knowledge of this deponent with his wife and family
and was and is a subiect of the King of Spaine and so accounted
and this deponent by letters and Correspondencies doth know that
he the sayd James for severall yeares now past hath driven and
still doth drive a trade from Rouane in ffrance to Cadiz in Spayn
with linnens for his owne accompt. and that he hath had and hath
his factors and Agents in those places respectively to and for the etter
carrying on of that trade. And otherwise he cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.618v Annotate
To the 2. 3. and 4th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that the arlate James
Pinquett being about the moneth of October 1652 sick att his house
in Antwerpe this deponent went to visit him and then amongst
other discourse talking of his affaires he acquainted this deponent
that he was to send a great Adventure of linnens from Rohan to
Cadiz and thereupon shewed this deponent severall letters from
Jacques ffermanel (who was and is the factor of the sayd producent att Rohan and
a Correspondent of this deponent) wherein the sayd ffermanel did
advise that according to the sayd Pinquets order he the sayd ffermanel
had bought and provided severall great quantities of linnens and
that he was a making them ready for packing to be with
the first convenient shipping sent to Cadiz for his the [?sayd]
producents accompt, and that he would as he was ordered draw
bills of exchange upon the sayd James Pinquett payeable att
Antwerpe for the paying for and satisfying the sayd linnens
and afterwards this deponent did see letters in the hands of the
sayd producent written by the sayd ffermanel wherein was certifyed
that the said ffermanel had drawne bills of exchange for the
sayd linnens upon the sayd Pincquet, who told this deponent that
he had accepted the same and would pay the same upon the
dayes in them limited; And this deponent hath audibly heard
that the sayd bills of exchange were satisfyed by the sayd James Pincquet
about the month of December 1652 videlicet about 2 monthes
after this deponent had seene the sayd letters of advise from
ffermanel as aforesayd. And further he cannot depose.

To the 5. and 6. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or
about the month of May last past being here in London he did
receyve a letter of advise from Juan Henricques de Messa (a
Correspondent of this deponent and likewise of the producent)
dated from Cadiz wherein the sayd Henricques did certify thi
deponent that whereas a great parcell of linnens had bene sent
to him from Fouane upon accompt of the sayd James Pincquet of Antwerpe
in the shipp Nightingale Henricques Glassoghen master Captaine
Badily Commander of an English Squadron of shipps had come into
the Bay of Cadiz in March 1653, whilest the sayd shipp was a delivering
of her lading, and that he the sayd Baddily had taken out of the
sayd shipp Nightingale into his English shippes 13 bales of linnen
marked 'S' and numbred .129. 141. 153. 173. 182. 302. 315.
318. 310. 324. R. V. X. all belonging to the sayd James Pincquet
and thereupon desired this deponent upon the arrivall of Captaine
Badily in England to make an enquiry after the sayd bales on the
behalfe of the producent. which this deponent (not long after
likewise receyving letters if advise from the sayd James Pincquet
dated from Antwerpe to the same effect) accordingly did, and [?found]
in the Custody of the Commissioners for prize goods here in London amongst
other goods that had bene delivered to them out of Captaine Badilys
shippe 13. bales of linnen marked and numbred as aforesayd whereof
as this deponent beleiveth thesayd James Pincquet att the tyme of their
such surprizall was and still is the true and lawfull Owner And further
cannot depose
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.619r Annotate
To the 7th article he saith he cannot depose.

To the 8th he saith he knoweth well the arlate shipp the Nightingale
Hendrick Glassoghen master and hath sayled in Company with
her from Cadiz to Hamburgh and saith she was and is an Hamburgh
shipp and her owners are all Hamburghers and subiects of the
free state of Hamburgh the place of this deponents nativity, and
for and as such the sayd shipp Nightingale was and is commonly
accounted reputed and taken. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

Rowe dt.

To the 1 he saith he was borne att Hamburgh and is an Inhabitant of
Antwerpe. and otherwise negatively.

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne the person of the sayd James Pincquet
6 yeeres but by Correspondencyes hath knowne him about 8 or 9
yeares during all which tyme he hath lived in Antwerpe where
his howse is in the Hoplandt and further saving his foregoing
depositions he cannot depose.

To the 3. he saith he knoweth well Jaques ffermanel interrate and so
hath done 6 yeares or thereabouts, and saith he is a ffrenchman
liveing in Roane with his family and so hath done for the sayd 6 yeares
and further he cannot depose

To the 4th he saith he was not present att nor saw the buying of the sayd
Linnen now Claymed and touching the ownershipp thereof saith he
can give noe other or further accompt than as aforesayd.

[ADD DATA]

To the 10th he saith the foresayd Juan Henricques de Messa to whom as it
seemes the sayd linnens were consigned is a native of Ipre, and is
a Bachelor and hath lived in Cadiz these 12 yeares last past or thereabouts
and further he cannot depose.

To the 14th negatively to every part thereof.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.619v Annotate
To the 15th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the .16. he saith that by the foresayd letters of advise sent to him
from James Pinequet and sayd Juan Henricques de Messa he
is given to understand that the foresayd linnens are french linnens
videlicet made in ffrance and that they were laden att Rohan by
Jaques ffemanel aforesayd (who is a frenchman and a subiect of the King of ffrance) but for the
accompt of the sayd James Pinquet who was and is a fflandrian
borne and inhabitant of Antwerpe as aforesayd. And otherwise
he saith he cannot depose.

George Bouchart [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
Repeated in Court before the Judges.
----
The nynth day of March 1653

Cludd against Todd)
Smith ffrancklin)

Examined upon an allegation on behalfe
of the sayd Cludd.

Smith dt.

1

Bartholomew Fillingham of the
Citty of Westminster gentleman aged 26 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in or
about the moneth of ffebruary 1645, and after the passing of the
Secund[?a] Decret[?a] in this Court on the behalfe of the arlate Mr
Edward Cludd against one eighth part of the arlate shipp
the Nathan the sayd Mr Cludd and the allegat Todd came to
an Accompt togethe, and upon the making up of the Accompt
betwixt them, the sayd Todd did stand really and truly indebted
unto him the sayd Mr Cludd in the summe of three hundred
eighty one pounds three shillings and nyne pence sterling
for part of which moneyes the sayd Todd gave unto
the sayd Mr Cludd three severall bills which were afterwards payd att the
severall tymes videlicet one bill for one hundred pounds
and another bill for eighty one pounds three shillings and
nyne pence, and one other bill for payment of twenty five
pounds. And saith that for the others seventy five pounds being
the remaynder of the sayd two hundred eighty one pounds [?three]
shillings and nyne pence, It was mutually concluded and
agreed by and betweene the sayd Mr Cludd and Mr Todd
that he the sayd Mr Cludd should have one sixteenth part of the
shipp the Nathan and her tackle and furniture to his owne use
and the other sixteenth part he the sayd Mr Cludd should [?XXX]
and transfer over unto the sayd Tod, and that thereup the [?sayd]
Mr Cludd should give unto him the sayd Todd agenerall release
which the sayd Mr Cludd accordingly did by a generall Release
bearing date some short tyme before the giving of the aforesayd [?bill]
and agreement made for the sixteenth part of the sayd shipp
as aforesayd. the premisses this deponent knoweth to be true for that
the tyme when the premisses happened he was an Apprentice to the
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.620r Annotate
Mr Cludd and was present att the making of the sayd agreement and was a
witnesse to the foresayd bills, and saw the sayd Release made, and did with
his owne hand in the bookes of Accompts of the sayd Mr Cludd (then kept
by this deponent and lately perused by him) enter the sayd 75. li as so much
money as allowed by the sayd Mr Cludd for the sayd one sixteenth part of the sayd
shipp Nathan according to the foresayd Agreement And further cannot depose
To the 2. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or about the
monethes of Aprill or May 1649 the tyme otherwise att present he remembreth
not the arlate Mr Cludd upon the receipt of the last moneyes due upon
the foresayd bills being 25 li pounds (which the sayd Todd did then and
not before pay to the sayd Mr Cludd) did make a Release unto the sayd Todd
but the sayd release was onely for the sayd moneyes so due upon the sayd 
bills and not any way out of any pretense whatsoever or any
way relating to the sayd sixteenth part of the sayd shipp to [?hold] by
him the sayd Mr Cludd according to the foresayd Agreement, but it
was then intended and meant by them both aswell the Release as the
Release (as he conceyveth) that notwithsatnding the sayd Release yet he the sayd Mr Cludd
should hold and keepe his sayd sixeteenth part of the shipp Nathan as
aforesayd, and that the sayd Release was to be noe barr or hinderance
thereunto, The premisses he knoweth for that on behalfe of the sayd
Mr Cludd he received the sayd 25 li of and from Mr Bateman who payd the same in the name and on behalfe of the sayd Mr Todd, and did draw the
sayd Release and procured Mr Cludds hand and seale thereto as to a release
from the sayd money due upon the sayd bills onely, and in the name of the sayd Mr
Cludd did deliver the same to the use of the sayd Todd as and for a release for the sayd
moneyes due upon the sayd bills and the same was so receyved and accepted
and the sayd Todd when he desired the sayd release made not any mention att
all of the sayd 16th part of the sayd shipp, or interest that the sayd Mr Cludd
had therein.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.620v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

----
The tenth day of March 1653

On the part and behalfe of Thomas)
Readbeard in a Busines of Insurance)
against Gifford Bake Edward Holcombe)
and others Assurers about the shipp the)
Report whereof Edward Dunning was)
late Master. Smith.)

Examined upon Interrogatories on the
behalfe of the sayd Thomas

Rpt. W Ch.

1)

Thomas Robinson of Ratcliffe in the
County of Middlesex Mariner late Gunner of
the sayd shipp the Report aged 35 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.621v Annotate
The same day.

Examined upon the foresayd allegation

Rpt. w. Ch.

2)

Henry Gray of Redriffe in the County of Surrey
Mariner late one of the Company of the sayd shipp the
Report aged 21 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.622r Annotate
The tenth day of March 1653.

The Clayme of Nicholas Waters Egbert)
Evers Leonard ffewen and others of Embden)
for the shipp the Stadt howse of Embden)
of which Gerret Johnson is master and)
her tackle et cetera and freight et cetera seized by)
one of the shipps of this Commonwealth)
Suckly Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers

Gerret Janson of Embden Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Stadt howse
aged 36 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth
of August 1653 last past the arlate Nicholas Waters Egbert Evers
Loenard  ffewen and others all of Embden did imploy him this deponent
to goe to Enchuisen in Holland to buy a shipp for their use and accompt
and this deponent being so employed came to Enchuisen and finding
the sayd vessell now called the Stadthowse of Embden there videlicet
att Enchuisen, and likeing the same well did treat with the builders
thereof about the buying of the same, and upon such treaty returned
to Embden to give accompt of his imployment to his Owners who
had sent him, and having given them an accompt aswell of the sayd
vessell now caled the Stadthowse of Embden as of other vessells which
he had seene at Enchuisen, they sent him this deponent back againe
to Enchuisen in order to make a full agreement for and by the sayd
vessell now called the Stadthowse, whereupon this deponent did about the
beginning of September goe againe to Enchuisen and did agree
for the sayd shipp as he was ordered by his sayd owners, and having so
done came back againe to Emden for money to pay for the sayd
vessell. And hee saith that hereupon the sayd Waters Evers ffewen
and other his Owners did five and deliver to this deponent a bill
of Exchange for five thousand six hundred guilders drawne
upon Jarrack Yeleverston Schedllinger att Amsterdam, which
bill of Exchange this deponent tooke and brought with him from
Embden to  Amsterdam and there by vertue of the same did receive
the sayd moneyes of the sayd Yelverston, and having so receyved it
tooke the same with him to Enchuisen and there did pay the same
to the Carpenters who built the sayd shipp now called the Stadt
howse of Embden and sould the same to this deponent for accompt and
use of his foresayd owners, and to the Materiall men who furnished the
same with sayles cordage anchorage and other necessaries. And
this deponent having so bought and payd for the sayd shipp did receyve
a bill of sale from the sayd builders for the same under the seale of
Enchuyson. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the foresayd  Nicholas
Waters Egbert Evers and others his foresayd Owners did order him to
sayle the sayd vessell to ffrance there to seeke a freight for some
from
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.622v Annotate
free place, and if he could gett none such then to bring a lading of
salt or other gooods to Embden for their accompt, for which they as they sayd upon
this deponents arrivall in ffrance would make provision. And
the sayd shipp did accordingly under conduct of this deponent set
sayle for ffrance and being there arrived was freighted att Roan
to take in a lading of wines and other goods now on board att
Sarantam And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd alleagtion and the attestation and copy of the
bill of sale therein mentioned he saith that he was present
in the Stadthowse of Embden att the tyme the Owners  of the sayd
shipp in the sayd attestation now shewen him mentioned did before the
Magistrates there make oath to the effect and purpose in the sayd
attestation mentioned and saith the seale wherewith the same is
sealed was and is the usuall and knowne seale of Emden in such
cases used, and that he had on board his shipp when she was seized
an attestation of the same or like tenor which is now abiding
in the Registry of this Court whereto he referres himselfe. And
that he had on board his sayd shipp the originall bill of sale of the sayd shipp
which is now in the Registry of this Court and that he sent a Copy
thereof from Enchusen to his owners att Embden by the poste
and beleiveth that the arlate attestation and copy of the sayd bill
of sale were sent from his sayd owners or some of them to Mr
Van Santon here in London. And further cannot depose.

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he
hath not lived in Holland or any other place under the States of the
United Provinces for theise 12 yeares last past, but saith that
for theis three yeares last past he hath lived and still doth live
with his family att Embden and is there marryed to an Emden
woman. and for eight yeares next and immediately before he
lived with his wife and family att Elsinur in Denmarke and
before that att Embden, and was there upon the marrying of his
now wife (which is 12 yeares agoe) made a Burgher of Embden
which priviledge upon  his returne to Embden was about 3 yeares
agoe renewed to him, and he is now a Burgher of Embden
so accounted. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That the sayd
vessell the Stadt House of Embden in her Course from ffrance to the
Downes not farr from Dover was taken about the beginning
of ffebruary last past by some of the shipps of this Commonwealth
and not before. And saith that the said vessell had onely Embden
Colours on board her att the tyme of the sayd seizure which he deposeth bbeing master of the sayd shipp And further
he saith he cannot depose.

To the last he saith his deposition is true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

Row dt.

To the 1. and 2 Interrogatoryes he saith he was in the sayd shipp the Statehowse
when she was seized by the shipps of this Commonwealth and was
Master of her and so hath bene from the  building and
buying of her videlicet from September last past 1653
[?XXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.623r Annotate
saith he was borne att Durgherdoo in Holland, and for theis
three yeares last past hath lived and kept his family in Emden
and for eight yeares next before att Elsinore as aforesayd, and
saith he hath interest in the sayd shipp to the value of one hundred
and ten guilders but hath noe goods att all on board her and saith the sayd vessell began her outwards
voyage from Enchuesen aforesayd abouut the middle of October last
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 3d. Interrogatory he saith the sayd shipp was first bought by this Rendent
in the month of September last past att Enchuysen where she was
built and there this deponent payd for the same 5600 guilders
to say for the hull thereof 2538 guilders to the Timbermasters
Jacob and Jan Williamson of whom he bought the same, and the rest
for the tackle furniture and provisions thereof to severall persons
Inhabitants and tradesmen of Enchuisen of whom he could buy the
same best Cheape  whose names he saith
he remembreth not. And saith he was present at the making of
the sayd bill of sale and was a party and privy thereto.

To the .4th he saith he payd all the sayd money himselfe and further saving
as aforesayd cannot depose.

To the 5th. he saith he receaved order for buying of the saud shipp as aforesayd by
word of mouth and not by or in writing.

To the 6. he saith, that Jarroch Yelloverston Schellinger of whom
this Reendent receaved the sayd money in manner as aforesayd was and is
an Inhabitant of Amsterdam, and a Burgher there as this Rendent
beleiveth, and a subiect of the States of the United Provinces, and saith
that he delivered the sayd moneyes to this Rendent by vertue of the sayd
bill of excheange, bu which meanes it was and became the proper moneys
of the foresayd Owners of Emden And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the .7th. he saith that he was at Emden since he bought the sayd
shipp but not since the tyme he payd for the same and he knoweth
as he saith that the sayd Owners of Emden have fully satisfyed
the sayd Yelleverston for the sayd moneyes by a great quantity of
herrings which the sayd Owners as they told this Rendent had
formerly sent to the sayd Yelloverston for their owne accompt
which he the sayd Yelloverston receaved and payd the sayd moneyes as and
for the proceeds thereof, but saith he was not present when the sayd
herrings were delivered nor knoweth who delivered the or when

To the eighth Interrogatory he saith he cannot further depose then as
in his foregoeing depositions whereto he referreth himselfe
he hath allready deposed saving that he did not deliver the
foressayd Copy of his bill of sale to the Claymers themselves but sent
the same as aforesayd by the common post in the month of October
last past before he went to sea upon this voyage

[XXXX XXXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.623v Annotate
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

Erloffe Cornelison of Emden Mariner
Steersman of the sayd shipp the Stadt Howse
of Emden aged 36 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To the third article of the sayd allegation and the schedules thereunto annexed
he saith that one of the sayd shcedules bearing the forme of an
attestation with a seale att the bottome thereof now shewne him
was and is sealed with the seale of the sayd Citty of Emden. And
further he saith he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.624r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. and 2d Interrogatories he was on board the sayd shipp att the tyme of her seizure
as aforesayd and was steersman of her and so had bene for about four
monethes, and first came on board the sayd shipp att Amsterdam. And
he this deponent was borne neere to Stockholme in Swethland under
the dominions of the Crowne of Sweden and saith that for present he is
an Inhabitant of Embden and so hath bene for these 6 monethes
with his wife Child and family. and for five yeares next
before he lived with his wife att Stockholme aforesayd, and there
videlicet att Stockholme he lived all his tyme next before a Bachilor
from his youth but as a sea faring man without an house or
family. and saith that he hath no part or interest in the sayd shipp
or goods oon board her. and touching the foresayd skipper Johnson
he cannot durther depose than in his foregoeing depositions
he hath sett forth And otherwise cannot depose

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.624v Annotate
To the 8th Interrogatory he saith that the sayd Gordt Janson did [?after]
such tyme as he had bought the sayd vessell goe to Emden
from Euchuisen and att his returne to Euchuisen brought
the forementioned bill of exchange with him to proure
moneyes to pay for the shipp, And further he cannot
depose, no knoweing who sent the schedules interrate to
London

Erloff [MARKE] Cornelison [MARKE, RH SIDE]
his firme
----
The 14th day of March 1653

On the behalfe of Isaack Phillips)
and Company Imployyers of)
the shipp the Suckley, whereof)
Walter Randall is Captaine)
against the shipp Angelo)
Cuystode).

Examined upon Interrogatoryes ministred on the behalfe
of the sayd Isaack Phillips.

Baptista ab Alexandro of Venice
one of the Company of the sayd shipp the Angelo
Custode. aged 21 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

Smith dt.

To the first Interrogatory This deponent saith that he was one of the
Company of the interrate shipp the Angelo Custode att the time
of her seizure by the Suckly, as a private mariner [?only]
and hath so belonged to her 4 monethes or thereabouts [?videlicet]
from the first setting fort of the sayd shipp upon this [?voyage]
from Venice where he saith he came first on board her and
saith one Burghetti an Inhabitant of Venice and a Venetian
borne was and is att Venice commonly held and reputed to be [?the]
Owner and Proprietor of the sayd shipp, bu how long he hath
bene owner thereof, how he came by her, or what he payd
or to whom he saith he knoweth not, neyther doth he know
as he saith where the sayd shipp was built not by whom
nor for whose use or accompt. And otherwise cannot depose saving
that he this deponent did not see him the sayd Burghetti paye
money for the sayd shipp.

To the 2 Interrogatory he saith that the Captaine or Commander of the
shipp is a Venetian and liveth att Venice in the house of his
father who is likewise a venetian. and that the Pilot of the
shipp us a Dutchman an high German as he conceyveth
and that five more of the sayd shipps Company are Venetians
and the cooke of the sayd shipp is a fflemming and the [?boatswaine]
of the sayd shipp is an Englishman and one other of her
Company an Hamburghese, And further not knowing [?where]
the sayd persons have lived for theis ten yeares last past [?nor ?where]
they have families he cannot depose, saving that [?XX]
[?XX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.625r Annotate
this deponent is a Bachiler and for theis 6 yeares last past hath
bene a Mariner and in that ymployment hath bene in Italy Spaine
fflanders as voyages happened and now in England, and before
he so became a Mariner lived constantly att venice where he
saith he was bourne.

To the 3rd and 4th and 5th he saith that the said shipp Angolo Castado[?] began this present
voyage about 4 monethes agoe from the Citty and port of Venice
and from thence sayled directly to Zant laden with about 50[?]
baggs of Anniseeds, and empty butts for Carrans, and money
to buy and provide the sayd Currans, which anniseed and empty butts
and money was taken in att venice for accompte as he heard att
venice and beleiveth of the said Burghetti, and the same being
arrived and brought in the said shipp to Zant. The said butts and
were delivered to a Certaine merchant whose name he knoweth
not which merchant returned the said butts back againe filled with Currants being about 140 or
160 butts being laden on board the said vessell Angelo Custade[?]
departed therewith and the foresaid Anniseeds from Zant to Messina, and there tooke
in fresh water, and from Messina she sayled her direct Course
for Dantzyck being her port of discharge, but in her way was
mett with and surprized by the Suckly frigatt and brought into a
little Isle nere to ffalmouth and from the said Isle was brought
to ffalmouth where she now remaynes. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the 6th Interrogatory he saith he did not see any bills of lading signed
for the said goods nor any of that nor knoweth what or how many were
signed nor doth he know or hath heard that there were any privat
notice or Instructions to sayle the said shipp for Amsterdam or any
other port or place in Holland or Zealand or ffrance in case
the same might or could passe unmolested, nor knoweth nor hath
heard of any directions given but for dantzyck onely. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 7th Interrogatory he saith he neyther saw knoweth nor hath heard
of any [Charter party?] that was made for this voyage. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the 8th Interrogatory he saith he doth not know what bills of lading
were in or found on board the said shipp and further cannot depose.

To the 9th Interrogatory he saith he doth not know beleive nor hath
heard that there were any bills of lading letters or other papers
whatsoever anyway concerning the said shipp or her lading hid
eyther within or without the said shipp, or burnt found throwne
overboard or made away after or before the seizure of the
sayd shipp. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 10th Interrogatory he saith that the foresaid Burghetti who was
said att venice to be the lader of the saod Anniseeds Butts and money
was
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.626r Annotate
B.6

The [11]th day of ffebruary 1653.

A [busines] of Examination of witnesses)
on the part and behalfe of Samuell Raymond)
and Company owners of the shipp the)
James whereof the sayd Samuell Raimond)
was master being onwers and laders of)
the sayd shipp or a great part thereof)
which shipp and lading was seized)
of the King of Denmarke or his)
Ministers with in the Kingdome)
Clements.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd [Samuel] Raymonds and Company

[?XXXX] dt.

Samuel Raymond of Ipswich in the County of
Suffolk Mariner master of the sayd shipp the
James aged 37 yeares or thereabouts a witness
sworne and examined deposeth and saith and affirmeth
[videlicet.].

To the first article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in May June
July August September October November December January
and February 1652. and ever sithence this deponent
Major [Swalinge] Jeremy [Cole] ffrancis Searbey and others all
English men were and att present ought to be the true and lawfull
owners of the sayd shipp the James her tackle apparell and furniture
and so accounted which he knoweth for that the sayd owners did in the
yeare 1651 and beginning of the yeares 1652 build the sayd
shipp att their owne charges and for theier owne use and accompt att
Ipswich and saith that in the monthes aforesayd he this deponent was
Master and Commaunder of the sayd shipp and so accounted And otherwise
he saith he cannot depose.

To the 2nd and 3rd articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in the month
of May aforesayd 1652 the sayd shipp being ymployed upon a
voyage into the Baltique Sea for Eastland [commodities] to [retiurne] with
the same for this Port of London did putt sayle from Ipswich upon the
sayd voyage about the seventh day of the sayd moneth of May and did
towards the latter end of the sayd month under the conduct of this deponent
arrive safely att Dantzick and in the beginning of [June] this
next ensueing att Quinsborough to, and there this deponent did
buy and lade aboard the sayd shipp for his owne Accompt the severall
kinds and quantityes of goods here afforementioned which were were worth
and would have yeilded in England att an ordinary markett the
respective summes or prices hereafter particularly set forth that 
is to say 2400 Ells of Henderlands Linnen. worth 80. listerling
75 peices of Pouldavies att 20 s a peices worth 78 li sterling. six [?stuck]
of 4 foot Clapboard of the value of 40 li sterling. 60 [deales] 24 feet
long and 2 Inches thick att 4 s per [deale] worth 12 li sterling. four
keggs of sturgeon att 22 s per kegg worth 4 li. 70 dozen of trenchers
at 60 the dozen worth 2 li 20 s: and this deponent had apparell and
necessaries of his owne on board the sayd shipp well worth 20 li sterling att
the least. And the shipps company of the sayd shipp being 12 men and a
boy had apparell and necessaries on board the said shipp of the
value of 100. li sterling. And saith the sayd mariners had on board
the sayd shipp for their owne accompt and adventure goods and
merhandises of the value of 348 li, 10 s sterling. All which goods wares
and merchandises were att or neere Quinsborough laden and
putt on board the said shipp to be therein transported to this Port of London
and there disposed of to and for the sole use benefitt and posession
of this deponent and his shipps company according to their respective
Interrogatories therein as aforesayd, which goods were all laden in
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.626v Annotate
the moneth of June 1652. and being laden the sayd shipp James still
conducted by this deponent arrived therewith safely about July then
next following att Copenhagen in denmarke. And further cannot
depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that
was a new staunch and well built shipp of the burthen of neare
two hundred tonnes with 4 gunnes and all things necessary and
was really worth with her gunnes furnitue apparell and mun[itions]
the sume of 1400 li sterling. and for a lesser summe this deponent
would not have sold her. and otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that the sayd shipp [with]
all the foresayd goods on board her continued att Copenhagen till the mon[th]
of September 1652 and being then to have come for England with a comp[any]
of English men of war was there detayned and stayd and not
suffered to proceed upon her voyage. and saith that in [ffebruary]
her next [enseing] the sayd shipp James whereupon the [?foresaid]
goods and Cloathes then likewise were), was by the authority [of]
the King of Denmark and by his ministers absolutely seized
by force and this deponent and shipps company wholly taken
out of possesion of her and her foresayd lading where by the sayd
shipp goods Clothes and necessaryes aforesayd of the respective
value aforesayd were and are wholly and absolutely lost to the
foresayd respective true owners thereof. And otherwise cannot
depose.

To the 6th article of the sayd allegation he saith that by reason of the
seizure the owners of the sayd shipp have suffered other [?XXXX
[losses] to [?pay] in freight of the merchants goods in the sayd voyage
250 li sterling. And in wages and victuall for the mariners
of the said shipp 156 li. And this deponent and shipps
Company have suffered dammage in losse and and expenses and
travayle home for England 300 livres sterling over and beyond
the losse of improvement of the stock of the sayd moneyes. And
otherwise he cannot depose.

Samuell Raymond [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day

Examined upon the sayd allegation

Clements dt.

2

Philip Newton of Ipswich in the County of Suf[folk]
mariner late masters mate of the sayd shipp the
James aged 41 yeares a witness sworne and examined deposeth [and]
saith as follows videlicet.

To the 1st. 2nd. and 3rd articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that in
the yeare 1651 the arlate Samuel Raymond and Company all Englishm[en]
did att Ipswich build the sayd shipp the James for their owne use and [in]
May 1652 she was ymployed by her sayd Owners under conduct of [the]
sayd Raymond upon a voyage from Ipswich to Dantzick and Quinsb[orough]
and so to London and in pursueance of the sayd voyage did towards [the]
latter end of the sayd month of May arrive safely att Dantzick and
June next following att Quinsborough. And saith that the sayd
Samuel Raymond did then and there for his owne use and accompt bring
[and]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.627v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The same day Examined upon the sayd allegation.

[?Clements dt]

3

Edward Patison of Ipswich in the County of
Suffolk mariner late Boatswaine of the shipp the
James aged 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth videlicet


[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.628r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 13th day of ffebruary .1653.

On the behalfe of the Lord Protector)
against John Pibus

Examined upon the sayd Articles.

Row dt.

3

John Wilmar of East Smithfeild London Baker late
one of the Company of the Martha aged 38 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposetha nd saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To the .5th. article he saith That in the monethes of May June July August
and September last past 1653. the sayd John Pibus was master of
the sayd shipp the Martha and had the government of her as Master and was
att sea with her in a fishing voyage made with her from this Port
of London to Greenland and back againe in which expedition this
deponents erved in her being hired for worke and imployment to be
done a shoare att Greenland and saith the sayd shipp did sayle from
this
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.629r Annotate
to the 2 Interrogatory he saith he was att sea with the said Pibus in the Mary
and saw the sayd Pibus take the dutch vessell and goods aforesaid
and saith he so tooke the same upon the Coast of Shetland about the latter
end of August last past and the Skipper of the said dutch shipp did say
in this deponents hearing that his shipp and goods were borne for
Holland but this Respondent heard him not name any particular port
and this deponent saw the said Pibus by the assissances of his Company
upon the day of her seizeure about the latter end of August in the tyme
he otherwise remembereth not, and about 8 of the Clock of the
evening of the same day, thirty Rolls of Tobacco one vessell
of fatt of Indico and 2 parrotts: and further not remembering
the day of the weeke when the premises happened nor knoweing of
the selling of all or any of the said goods he saith he cannot depose

John [MARK] Wilmar
his mark
----
The fifteenth day of ffebruary 1653

The cleryance of Samuell Palache alias )
Jacob Carlus merchant of haburgh )
for his goods and Jewells in the )
shipp the Prophet Eliias whereof )
Simon [C??ison] Prophiet is master taken )
by the same of the Parliament Shipps )
Smith Budd )

Examined upon an allegation on the behalf
of the sayd Claymer

Abraham Israel Ben Atquino
of Rohan in Normandy doctor of Phisick
aged 65 yeares or thereabout a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth viz.

To the 1. 2. and 3d articles he saith he cannot depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That he knoweth
well the arlate Samuel Palache otherwise Jacob Carolus and
so hath done from the very Infancy of him the sayd Samuel And
allso well knew the father grandfather and uncle of him the
sayd Samuel in the tyme and tymes of their respective lives
And saith that the arlate Samuel party in this cause was and is a
Subiect of the King of Morocco and so accounted And his father
whose name was likewise Samuel whilest he lived was a subiect
of the sayd King and was for many yeares untill the tyme of his
death imployed by the sayd Kinge as his Ambassador or Agent
for him to the States of the united Provinces where this deponent
saw him in the said office and dignity of such an Abassador and so there
received and accounted, and that he dyed in Holland in that Embassy
And saith that in the life tyme of the sayd Samuel the father and during
his sayd Embassy the arlate Samuel the son now party in this cause
was borne in Holland where this deponent saw him an infant And
further saith that after the death of the sayd Samuel the father the
arlate Abraham Palache the grandfather by marriage of the sayd
Samuel did succeed in the foresaid Embassy in Holland
and there dyed and was buryed with great solemnity as an
Ambassador and publiq person the Prince of Orange and the Lords
of the States of Holland accompanying his funerals thereat he this deponent
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.629v Annotate
was likewise personl. And further saith that after the death of the
said Abraham Palache the aclate david Palache brother to the
sayd Abraham and a subiect of the Kign of Morocco succeeded in the
same Embassy in Holland and there dyed. And saith that after
the death of the sayd David the arlate Samuel Palache alias Jacob [?Carlos]
party in the cause was by the sayd King of Morocco appointed and
made his Ambassador or Agent to the foresaid States of the united Provinces
and allso to the King of denmarke, and for and as such an Ambassador
and Agent be the said Samuel party in this suit was of the deponents
observacion and knowledge and for an as such he was and is
commonaly accounted reported and taken And this deponent [?secondly]
to have the more particular knowledge of the premises for that all the
foresaid Palaches above named as this deponent was and is
were and the said Samuell the son is of the Jewish race and Religion
whereof this deponent was a member who for about fifty yeares
[XXX] till within three yeares last past that this deponent hath resided
in England, was for the most part [XXX] in Holland otherwise
cannot depose.

To the 5th he saith he hath credibly heard the said Samuell Palache
party in this suit hath for theis three yeares last past constantly inhabited
in Hamburgh and further saiing as aforesaid cannot depose

To the 6th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that it is [?usual]
for people of the Jewish Nation by reason that in some places they are
not admitted freely to trade, to have and make use of severall [p????]
and he hath credibly heard that the sayd Samuel Palache arlate is
called and knowne by the name also of Jacob Carlos, and saith he
hath lately here in London seene and discoursed with and Samuel
Palache the son Ambassador or Agent in Holland as aforesaid was and is
one and the same person and not divers. And further he cannot depose

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1 he saith he knoweth well Samuell Palache interrogatorie and know
him from infant as aforesaid and conceyveth him to be able 36 or
37 yeares of age and saith he knew well his father and mother
who were both of the Jewish Nation but as he beleiveth borne in
Morocco. And Samuell Palache interrogatorie was borne as aforesaid in
Holland and in the Hague as this [??ondent] beleiveth. And fother
Saving as aforesaid hee cannot depose.

To the 2 he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

[signed:] Abraham Israel ben Atquino
----
The same day [CENTRE HEADING]

Examined upon the said allegation

Solomon ffranco of Cambridge Professor and Teacher of
the Hebrew Tongue aged 37 yeares or thereabouts a
witnesse sworne and examined deposeth and saith as follows
videlicet

To the 1 2 and 3 actiles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith he cannot
depose./

To the forth and fifth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he
knoweth well the arlate Samuel Palache and so hath done from
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.630r Annotate
his youth he the sayd Samuell and this deponent having bene schoole
fellowes together in one and the same School in their youth att
Amsterdam where this deponent hath lived for the greatest part of his life. And saith that the sayd Samuel was then att Amsterdam
and in the said Schoole commonly accounted to the naturall and lawfull
sone of Samuel Palache then lately dead Ambassador of the
King of Morocco and that the sayd Samuel was borne during that
Embassy. And saith the said Samuels father being then dead
the Grandfather of the sayd Samuel by the mother succeeded in the
said Embassy and after his death david the brother of the sayd
Grandfather did likewise succeeded him in the same Embassy and
for and as an Ambassador of the said King of Morocco was of
this deponents observacion in Holland commonly accounted and esteemed
And further the sayd Palaches were all commonly accounted
subiects of the said King of Morocco as likewise was and is the
said Samuel party in this Cause who about 10 or 12 yeares agoe of in this deponents knowledge
went with his mother from Amsterdam into Morocco and is
since as this deponent hath credibly heard intrusted with some
publiq Embassy or Agency to the King of denmarke, and hath
for about a yeare resided att Hamburgh having as this
deponent hath likewise heard drawne his estate or goods part
thereof from Amsterdam to Hamburgh. And further he
cannot deposeth

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
Samuel Palache was and is named also Jacob Carolus, And saith
that Jacob Carolus and Samuel Palache was and is one and the
same person and not divers, and that he is called and known by the
name of Samuel Palache alias Jacob Carlus which he saith was
and is usuall among the Jewes [XXX] the use of a another name [XXX] their [XXX] for preserving of their goods in such
places where that people is proscribed from trade and commerce
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1 he saith the said Samuel Palache was by repute borne att the
Hague in Holland and his father and mother were Jewes of
Morocco which his mother was well know to this Respondent as likewise
his sayd grandfather and uncle but his father this Respondent
knew not he dying in this deponents infancy and soone after
the birth of the sayd Samuel for which cause his sonn was
called by his name, a matter not usuall among the Jewes as
in the youth of the said Samuel this Respondent heard. And
otherwise he cannot depos

To the 2nd he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

[signed:] Salemon Franco
----
The fifteenth day of ffebruary 1653

On the behalf of the Anthony Woolward )
and Company Owners of the shipp the )
Elizabeth and Mary of London whereof )
the sayd Anothony Wollwoard was Master being )
[XXX] and Laders of the sayd shipp )
[XXX] part thereof which shipp and lading )
was seized by the King of denmarke )
[XXX] his Ministers within that Kingdome )
Clemente )

Examined upon an allegation on the behalf
of the Owners of the said Shipp

Anthony Wollward of Harwich in the County of
Essex Mariner late Master of the sayd shipp the Elizabeth
and Mary aged 54 yeares of thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.630v Annotate
To ye first article of ye sayd allegacon This deponent saith that for and during
all ye tyme arlate and indeed for  theis eleven yeares last past
Captaine John Vanter Captaine Sussex [?Carnack] Roger Coleman, John [?CopXX]
William Martin and this deponent and others all Englishmen have been
and present are and ought to be the Owners and Proprietors of the arlate
shippe the Elizabeth and mary her tackle Apparell and furniture and
he this deponent for all ye sayd tyme till he was dispossest of her by ye Kinge
of Denmarke as hereafter followeth was master of her and is and was owner
of part of her ladinge. the premisses he knoweth for yt himselfe and
Company aforesayd built ye sayd shipp att Woodbridge about 11 yeares last
past and have ever sithence continued quiet possession thereof till
ye Kinge of Denmarke despoyled them of her, taking her out of the
possession of this deponent who was master of her as is hereafter
sett forth. And othwrwise he cannot depose.

To ye second article of ye sayd allegation This deponent saith That in May 1652
ye arlate shipp Elizabeth and Mary being upon a  merchants voyage for ye
Baltique sea for East Countrey goods, sett sayle from Harwichunder ye
Commannde of this deponent and arrived safely att Riga about ye end of June or beginning
of July next following and there tooke in her lading hereafter mencconed
and in August then next enseuing arrived with ye same in safety att
Copenhagen in Denmarke. And otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

To ye third article of ye sayd allegacon This deponent saith that ypon ye arrivall of
ye sayd shipp att Riga as aforesayd He this deponent did with his owne money
buy and provide and for his owne sole accompt lade on board ye sayd
shipp Elizabeth and mary att Riga the severall parcells of goods [?XXX]
hereafter  particularly specifyed which were really worth and would have
yeelded in London in the Judgment of this deponent ye severall and
respective prices summes or values hereafter particularly mencconed
that is to say. three lasts of hempe worth 36 shillings per hundred being in
whole 108 li sterling also three last of flax worth 50 shillings per C beinge
in ye whole 150 li sterling. allso eleven hundred of Clapboard att 6 li per
C. worth 66 li sterling. also 30 Rough oares worth 4 shillings a peice and
in all 6 li sterling. also 15 C Pipestaves worth 12 li per thousand
making in all 18 li sterling. And ye Mariners of the shipps Company
being in all 26 persons did the tyme and place aforesayd buy [?XX XXX]
and lade on board the sayd shipp severall goods wares and merchandizes
of the value of 300 li sterling or thereabouts. and saith that the sayd
Mariners bedding and Cloathes and necessaries on board the sayd
shipp were worth 100 li sterling of thereabouts over and besides the
Chyrurgeons Chest and Instruments which was worth 13 li sterling or thereabouts and
saith that the sayd shipp was with her sayd goods bound to this Port of
London here to discharge the foresayd goods for the respective Accompts
aforesayd, but was seized att Copenhagen with all the foresayd goods as is
hereafter sett forth. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
shipp the Elizabeth and Mary was an able staunch and well built shipp
and was of the burthen of 350 tonnes and upwards and had 20 peeces of
Ordinance in her and was well provided with provisions tackle and
furniture and munition of all sorts proportionably. And saith the [?shipp]
was well worth with her gunnes tackle apparell and furniture the sumem
of 2800 li sterling and for a lesse summe this deponent would not have
sold her. And otherwise he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.631r Annotate
To the fifth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the sayd shipp
the Elizabeth and Mary in August of 1652 arrived safely att Copenhagen withall the
foresayd goods Clothes and necessaries in her and was there in
September then next ensueing deteyned and hndred from proceeding upon her voyage
for London by the order if the King of denmarke and in ffebruary 1652 then
next ensueing was by the power and authority of the King and
the armed force of his Ministers and people absolutely seized withall
the foresayd goods aCloatehs an necessaries, and this deponent
who was present and saw the premisses so done ws by the sayd power and
force absolutely dispossest of the sayd shipp and goods aforesayd by meanes
and reason whereof the sayd shipp and all the foresayd goods are
become lost to the forementioned true owners thereof. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by meanes
and reason of the premisses this deponent and Company owners of
the sayd shipp have besides the dammages aforesayd lost in the freight of
the merchants goods in the foresayd voyage amounting to 700 li
sterling and the losse of their sayd shipps ymployment 100 li sterling per month. nd this deponent in his losse of tyme and expenses
in denmarke and travaile home for England over and besides
the dammages afresayd hath susteyned dammage to the value of
200 li sterling. And otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

Anthony wollward [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The same day Examined upon the sayd allegation

Clements dt.

2)

Thomas Bemmester of Shadwell in the County
of Surrey Mariner Boatswaine of the sayd shipp the
Elizabeth and Mary aged 30 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth
videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.631v Annotate
15 li. And the Mariners of the sayd shipp being 26 persons had
on board the sayd shipp an Adventure of goods bought and laden by
them for their owne accompt of the value of 320 sterling or
thereabouts. and their Cloathes and bedding aboard the sayd shipp
were well worth 120 li or thereabouts. and the Chyrurgeons
Chest and Instruments were worth 11 li and upwards And
saith the sayd shipp was bound for London here to deliver the goods
aforesayd according to the respective accompts aforesayd. And further
he cannot depose.

Tpo the fourth he saiththe sayd shipp was a strong and firme shipp
of the burthen of 350 tonnes and upwards and had 20 gunnes
and furniture and munition proportionable and was with
her gunnes and furniture well worth in the Judgement of
this deponent 2900 li sterling or thereabouts. And otherwise
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

and in losse of her imployment
120 li per moneth thereabouts over and esides losses of tyme
of the master and Company of the sayd shipp, wherein this deponent
inhis owne paricular losse of imployment by meanes of the
sayd detetion and seizure hath suffered dammage to the
value of 30 li sterling att the least. And otherwise hee
cannot depose
----
The sixteenth day of ffebruary 1653.

Stephens and Company against the)
shipp the Ann whereof John Haynes)
is Master and against John Wade)
Henry Godscall and Company)
comeing in for their Interest)
Smith ffranklyn)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd John Wade and Companie

pd

Benjamin Arundell of ffalmouth
merchant aged thirty yeares or
therabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet

To the furst and 2d articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the moneth
of October last past 1653 the arlate Giles Burdean (sometymes
called by the name of Giles ffountaine Burdeaux) being the
reputed lawfull owner of the arlate ship the Ann and her
lading of salt being about 350 tonns of salt did [?XXX]
and
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.632r Annotate
and in Consideration of the summe of fifteene thousand and five
hundred Livers Turnois really and truly sell unto the arlate
John Woode, and the sayd John Wood did the tyme aforesayd
really and truly buy of the sayd Giles Bardeau the sayd shipp
and salt aforesayd for the sayd summe of 15.500 livers, which sayd
moneyes the sayd John Wood did really and truly pay unto the
sayd Giles Bardeau, who receied the same the Premisses he
knoweth to be true for that about [?XX] of the month
of November last past 1653 this deponent being att Brest
in ffrance and in Company with the sayd Wood and Burdeau did
att the signe of the three merchants there see the sayd Wood really
pay and the sayd Burdeau really receive the last payment of the
sayd moneyes being a large bagg of [?XXXX] amounting
to about 2000. lives turnois, and this deponent did
assist att the telling of the sayd moneyes

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.632v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 8th and 9th articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That
after the buying of the sayd shipp and salt and Interesting of the
persons therein as above is declared, the arlate John Wood
in November last past did att Brest on behalfe of himselfe
and Company appoynt the sayd shipp and lading of salt to goe to
Waterford in Ireland for accompt of himselfe and Company, and
appoynted the arlate John Haynes Master of her, and him this
deponent and the arlate Nowell Capemerchants or Sopra Cargos
and hired the Mariners that sayled along in her and have this
deponent order to pay the sayd Mariners, and ordered the sayd salt
be sold att Waterford for the same accompt, and the sayd shipp to be
reladed with herrings salmon and the like fish merchandize [?XX]
And accordingly before the sayd shipp came away from Brest the
sayd John Wood did furnish this deponent with Instructions
dated the 20th day of November 1653. and signed by himselfe and
the arlate Henry Godscall Stephen Proctor and Company
wherein they gave Order to this deponent and the sayd Nowell
how and in what manner to proceed in the sayd busines, which
sayd Instructions this deponent tooke to sea with him and upon [?the]
seizure in question delivered them to the sayd Bartlet, and this deponent
hath since seene the same in the Registry of this Court and  sawe
that the same were and are reall and true, and not false [?or]
feigned or Colourable. And otherwise he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.633r Annotate
To the 10th and 11th articles of the sayd allegation he saith that the arlate John Haynes
went principall master in and aboard the sayd shipp this voyage
and as principall master of her did att Brest before the sayd
shipp departed from thence in the presence and sight of this deponent
s8igne and firme a bill of lading for the sayd salt which bill
of lading was on board the sayd shipp att the tyme of seizure
and is now in the Registry of this Court ad is the very bill of lading now shewne him and further referringe
himselfe to the sayd bill of lading he cannot depose, saving
that the sayd salt att the tyme of the departure of the sayd shipp from
Breste and before and att the tyme of the seizure and since did
and doth really belong to the sayd John Waade Godscull and Company

[ADD DATA]

To the 12th articel of the sayd allegation this deponent saith that so farr as
he knoweth beleiveth or hath heard the arlate Moansiuer de Boris
had not nor hath not any Interest at all in the sayd shipp or her lading
of salt or any part thereof (1/13 part of 2 tonnes of white salt
and 1/3 part of one butt of vinegar excepted) neither did he signe
any bill of lading for any part of the goods laden on board the
sayd shipp nor was he the cheife master of the sayd shipp the voyage
wherein she was taken which he knoweth being Sopra cargo of
the sayd lading and further cannot depose.

To the 13. and 14th he saith he cannot depose of his knowledge
but beleiveth it to be very probable that the sayd Mounsieur de Boys
and the ffrench Mariners on board the sayd shipp were made use of
by the sayd Waade and Company for preserving of the sayd shipp and salt
from seizure by the ffrench and Hollands men of warr. And
further cannot depose.

To the 15th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
shipp the Ann with her sayd lading of salt in her did under the
Command of the sayd John Haynes as Master (this deponent and sayd
Nowell coming along in her as Cape merchants) sett sayle from
Brest about the 27th day of November last past 1653. for the
Port of Waterford in Ireland and in her Course thitherwards
the sayd shipp and her sayd lading of salt were taken and surprized
by Captaine Barltet and Company in the shipp Hopewell arlate
and brought to ffoy this deponent being present aboard her
att the tyme of seizure. And otherwise he cannot depose

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.633v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse interrogatories.

To the 1 he saith the sayd shipp is dutch built and of the burthen of [?XX]
tonnes, and was as this deponent hath heard and beleiveth taken
by the Interrate Captaine Corde (with the ladeing of [?bay] salt that is nowe on
board her sayling from ffrance to Holland and was retaken
by a man of warr belonging to the States of the United
Provinces but the name of the sayd shipp of warr or her captaine he
knoweth not, and saith that shipps taken by Holland men of war
and brought to Brest doe use there to be adiudged by [?XXX]
Coll a dutchman, a Judge of Agent there for the sayd States and
further to this Interrogatory he cannot depose saving that he never
saw any Copy of the adjudication for the sayd shipp.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.634r Annotate
under John Haynes aforesayd and from Waterford was to have the sole
Command of her the sayd shipp Ann back againe to ffrance and
was to have about 40 or 50 livers per month and was shipped by the
sayd Waad as this Rendent hath heard. and saith he knoweth well [?Misgell]
[?Xolly] an Irishman Pilot of the sayd ship for the sayd voyadge and he ws
to have 50 livers per month and otherwise negatively.

[ADD DATA]

To the 8th Interrogatory he saith he knoweth John Haynes interrate and
saith he was shippd principall master for Waterford and was to have 4 li
sterling upon the arrivall of the shipp there, and saith that the sayd
Haynes and most of the English Mariners having bene brought
prisoners to Brest were not willing to be hired any further
then Waterford, so as the sayd English mariners were hired for
3 li the man if they did not returne from Waterford, and in case
they did returne then they were to have monethly wages

[ADD DATA]

To the 9th Interrogatory he saith he was imployed in
this voyage ioyntly with the sayd Noel and not by way of assistance
onely, and this Rendent had order if he could to furnish the
sayd shipp with 12. 14 or 16 gunnes and ammuntion proportionable
att the discretion of this Rendent and in case the sayd gunnes could be
provided he this Rendent was resolved to have returned with
the sayd shipp for ffrance, but otherwise to stay in Ireland
and lett the sayd shipp returne to ffrance under the sayd Monsieur de Boys
with the sayd Noell and ffrench mariners and such English
mariners as would returne in her And otherwise he saith he
cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.634v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 12th he saith that he did putt aboard the sayd shipp as belonging
to himselfe and Mr Webber aforesayd 6. butts of brandy. 2 butts and
3 hogsheads of vinegar 2 pipes and 3 hogsheads of white sale. and saith
that one March an English Mariner aboard did embezle
and wast a good quantity of the sayd Brandy whereupon the sayd
Du Boys being one of the Masters of the sayd shipp did
beat the sayd March and turned him out of the sayd shipp at
Brest without wages there being none then due to him And
saith if this Rendent had not interposed the sayd Du Boy would
have sent the sayd Marsh to prison. And otherwise he
neyther knoweth nor hath heard. And further cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.635v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the 13th he saith there were on board the shipp over and besides
the sayd principall Cargo being 350 tonnes of bay salt, those goods
following to say. 6 pipes of brandy 5. belonging to [?this deponent]
and one to Mr Webber 2 hogsheads vinegar fir this deponent one
but and one hogshead of the same for Mr Webber, and one but of vinegar
for the sayd du Boiys. and one butt one pipe and 6 hogsheads of white
salt belonging to this Rendent the sayd Webber and sayd da Boyes
equall shares and [?XX] barrells more of white salt and
reames of paper and three cakes of pitch belonging to
this Rendent. and saith the french Mariners had some small
quantities of honey and some paper aboard for their accompt
And further saith he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
----
The seventeenth day of ffebruary 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

2.

William Webber of the parish of Saint Mary
Magdalen Bermondsey Mariner aged [?XXX]
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1. 2. and 3. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in the
moneth of Noember last past 1653 being att Brest with the
shipp Content whereof himselfe was master, and being then
in Company withthe arlate John Wood and Giles Burdeaux and
Giles ffountaine Burdeaux, his contest Beniamin [?AXXX]
being then and there likewise present, he heard the said Wood and
Burdeaux declare and acknowledge, that hee the sayd Burdeaux
was formerly the reputed lawfull owner of the arlate ship [?XXX]
then by the name of the Golden Halfe Moone and her [?XXX] lading of
bay salt being 350 tonnes or thereabouts) had in consideration
of fifteene thousand five hundred livers Turnois sold the sayd
shipp and lading of salt by bill of sale to the sayd Wood who had
bought the same at the same price and the sayd Burdeaux sis then
in the presence and hearinge of this deponent confesse and acknowledge
that the sayd Wood had really payd him the greatest part of the
foresayd 15500 livers upon the sayd contract for the shipp and salt, and that there remayned onely about 3000 livers
unsatisfyed
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.637r Annotate
the sayd John Waad deliver to the sayd Arrundell, and the sayd Arundells
relique att Brest as aforesayd And this deponent was present and saw
the foresayd John Waad
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.639r Annotate
⅛ th part. and sayd Cove and Priam each of them 1/16th. and that the
[?surplasage] (being 3/5ths of shipp and salt) doeth belong to the sayd
Waad. And saith he beleiveth the sayd Certificat is true for
that amongst other names written att the foot thereof hee findeth
the names of Joan Waad and Hen: Godsall. which he verily
beleiveth were respectively written by the foresayd Waad and Godsall
with whose Character and manner of writing and signing he
this deponent is well acquainted. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 18th

[ADD DATA]

To the 10th he saith the sayd John Waad is this Rendents Cousin
German his mother and this Rendents mother being sisters. and
he desireth that truth and right may take place in the event of
this suit. and otherwise negatively. And further cannot depose.

Wm: Webber [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated with his precontest
before the Judges in Court
----
The 24th day of february .1653.

In the behalfe of the said Lord Protector)
against John Pibus.)

Examined upon the foresaid
Articles

4).

William Bottily of Deptford in the County
of Kent Butcher late one of the Company
of the said ship the Martha aged 23 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.639v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1 and 2. he saith he lived at deptford, is by profession a Butcher and soe getts his living
and that he comes to testify of himselfe being the first that sett this busines [?on]
against the sayd Pibus. and expects such reward as the state shall thinke fitt to [?XXX]and saith the sayd dutch vessell was taken in September last past. and the sayd Pibus did [?of]
this Rendents knowledge take outof the sayd shipp and dispose of 26 Rolls of
Tobacco and 2 barrells f Indico the same day the sayd shipp was taken And
further saving his foregoeing depositions hee cannot depose

[?William ?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.640r Annotate
The second day of March 1653

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Baldero and others

'Thonas Bennester' of Shadwell
in the County of Middlesex Mariner late
Boatswayne of the sayd shipp Elizabeth
and Mary aged 31 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

a voyage to Riga in Leifland

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.640v Annotate
for that he is a Rope maker by trade and knoweth well
that in the yeare 1652. the best sort of hempe was here
sold in London at 36 s per hundred and the worser sort att [?3X]
per hundred. And saith the foresayd hempe allegat was a very good
sort of hempe. And he further saith that the foresayd
Cargazon of goods being so laden the sayd shipp Elizabeth
and Mary departed therewith from Riga and in August
1652 arrived safely therewith att Copenhagen in Denmarke
And that in September 1652 the foresayd shipp was by
authority of the King of denmarke stayd att Copenhagen
by an Embargo, and deteyned under the same till the
7th day of ffebruary 1652. upon or about which day the
Ministers of the sayd King did by force seize the sayd shippe
and Cargazon of goods and the foresayd bundles of hempe
under the markes aforesayd amongst the rest by meanes
of which seizure the sayd Wooland and Company were diposses
of the sayd shipp and her ladung, and the sayd Cargazon of goods
and the hempe marked as aforesayd amongest the restand
became lost to the English merchants the true owners
thereof which sayd owners over and besides the losse of the sayd goods
have suffered other great dammage in the want of improvement
of their stockes by meanes of the seizure aforesayd. And
otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

Thomas Bemaster. [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The tenth day of March 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

Anthony Woolward of Harwich in the County of
Essex Mariner Master of the sayd shipp
Elizabeth and Mary aged 54 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1 article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate shipp
the Elizabeth and Mary being ymployed in a voyage into the East
Countrey to returne from thence with a lading of East Countrey [?goods]
sett sayle from this Port of London about the month of Aprill [?last]
under Command of this deponent as Master of her and in pursuite
of that designe arrived safely att Riga in or about the moneth of ffebruary
1652. and there and in and about the moneth of July [?165X] tooke in her lading and [?having]
so done departed with the same and came therewith to Copenhagen
in Denmarke in or about the moneth of August .1652 (sic) of the
certayne knowledge of this deponent under whose Command [?she]
arrived there. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 2. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that after the arrivall
of the sayd shipp att Riga and about the 19th day of July 1652.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.641r Annotate
one Randolph Knipe did lade on bord the sayd shipp 40 bundles of
Ryne hempe conteyning 122 shipp pound and 12 Lipspound
15 hwereof were marked 'I:-' and 25 whereof were marked
'I:x', all for the accompt of the arlate James Young. and that one
herman Becker did about the 30th day of the sayd moneth lade
on board the sayd shipp forty bundles of Riga Rine hempe marked
'GA.' conteyning 118 shipppound and 12 laipspound but for
whose accompt he knoweth not. And that about the 27th day of
the sayd moneth of June the arlate Christopher van Warvyken
did lade on board the sayd shipp for accompt of the arlate George
Baldero forty bundles of Riga Rhine hemp weighing together
122 shipppounds and 12 1/2 luipspound marked 'B.' And that
the sayd Randolph Knipe about the 19th day of the sayd moneth of
July did lade on board the sayd shipp 20 bundles of Rhine
hempe marked 'H:-' conteining 58 shipp and 5 luip. but
for whose accompt he knoweth not.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.642v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the sixth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by meanes
aforesayd over and besides the above mentioned losses other great
dammages have happened to this deponent and his sayd owners to a
great value. to say the losse of the freight of the merchants goods
the sayd voyage to the value of 330 li sterling besides the use
thereof. And by way of demorage in case the dammage susteyned
in the sayd shipps detention and seizure shall be so cast upp videlicet after
a monethly rate the summe of eighty pounds sterling per moneth for
every moneth til she be restored.

[ADD DATA]
----
The 12th of March 1653.

On the behalfe of John Upton
aforesayd touchng his goods
seized in the Mary Anne)
by the King of Denmarke.

3.

William Bexbey of Alborough in the County of Suffolk
Mariner Master of the sayd shipp Mary Ann aged 27 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.643v Annotate
The seventeenth day of March 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4)

Martin Bride of Stralsondt Mariner Master
of the sayd shipp the Mary aged 30 yeares a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth
videlicet

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.646v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

Michael Duncar of Stralsondt merchant
aged 28 yeares or thereabouts a witness sworne
and examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]

And saith that the sayd shipp having taken in her sayd lading departed
with three other shipps all bound for London, but pretending for
dunkirke as the Mary likewise did. And saith [?endeavour]
was
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.647r Annotate
was used by the skippers of the sayd 3 shipps and Martin Broyd skipper
of the Mary to gett able pilotts for dunkirke in the Sound intending
however to sayle and make their Course for London, but they could
procure but one pilot for all the sayd shipps who was to be payd
by shares and contributions by all the sayd shipps, and it was
agreed that lotts hould be cast in which of the sayd shipps the
sayd pilot should goe, and that the shipp upon which the lott fell
should leade the way and the rest follow, and that the lots being
cast the sayd Pilott dell to the shipp Vischer one of the sayd 3 shipps
Caspar Vischer master, who taking the sayd Pilot to him lead the
way and the Mary and the other shipps followed, and
the sayd shipp Vischer and two other arrived safely att this port
though pretending for dunkerke as aforesayd, as the shipp
Mary would have likewise done had it not bene for a disaster she
mett with for he saith that upon her Course and whilset she
followed the sayd shipp Vischer, they mett with violent tempetuous
weather with strong Contrary winds blowing from the west
which continued for 8 or 9 dayes, and separated the sayd shipp Mary
from the Vischer and other two shipps, and made her very
leaky and drove her upon the Coast of Holland, so as there
being but 6 mariners on board one whereof was sick and one
a boy not able to worke in such weather or att the pumpe, the
foresayd Martyn Bride for preserving of the sayd shipp and her lading
and persons on board was necessitated to putt into the ffly and
so to Enchusen all which this deponent knoweth being Cape merchant
on board the sayd shipp and privy to and an eyewitnes of the sayd
severall passages. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 4th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that being so come
to Enchusen the arlate Martyn Bryde and this deponent went
over to Amsterdam and there petitioned the Court of Admiralty for
license to depart with the sayd shipp and goods to dunkerke, which the
sayd Court refusing to give way to without sufficient and
able security given that the sayd goods should be unladen att
dunkerke this deponent endeavouring but not being
able to give such security though promised by one freind
whom the Court would not accept, was enforced to dispose
the sayd goods in Holland, which he deposeth being privy
to the foresayd transactions and otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.649v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The Clayme of William Gillard merchant)
of Cadiz in Spayne for his goods)
in the Saint John de Grace taken by)
some of the Parliament shipps)
Smith Budd)

Jean de Casa Nueva of Cadiz in Spayne
merchant aged 24 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that he [?knoweth]
well the arlate William Gilliard, and so hath done for these [?fXXXXX]
yeares now last past and saith that the sayd William Gilliard
was and is a Spanaird borne and was and is an Inhabitant
of Cadiz in Spaine, and there hath lived for theis fifteene
yeares now last past and was and is a subiect of the Kinge
of Spaine and for and as such Commonly accounted reputed
and taken. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the
moneth of August arlate the sayd William Gilliard did goe from
Cadiz to Saint Malloes in ffrance to buy linnen Cloath and [?XX]
and transport the same to Cadiz for his owne use and accompt and of Claudio de Ullea, a spanyard and Inhabitant  of [?Cadiz]
And for the buying and provideing of the sayd Linnen Clothe [?did]
carry with him from Cadiz in Spaine to Saint Malloes divers sugers
and peaches for his owne Accompt and accompt of the sayd Ullea to the value of about three
thousand five hundred peices of eight, And the sayd William Gilliard [?XX]
arrived safely with the sayd sugars and peaches att Saint Malloes,
and there after his arrivall did sell the same and with the proceed
thereof bought and provided for his owne accompt and accompt of the sayd Ullea severall good
quantities of Linnen Cloath and serges The premisses he knoweth to be true
for that he saw the sayd sugars and peaches laden in Cadiz and went
along with the producent in one and the same shipp to Saint Mallo, and
there saw the sayd sugars and paches sold and the sayd Linnen [?cloth] and serges [?XXX]
by the producent for the accompt aforesayd And otherwise he
cannot depose:
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.650v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

he was borne in Asturias in Biscay
for theis 15 yeares last past and upwards hath lived in Cadiz and
further otherwise negatively

[ADD DATA]

To the 2. he saith he hath knowne the sayd Gilliard 15 yeares, and the sayd
Claudio de Villoa 12 yeares for all which tyme respectively the
sayd persons have lived and still doe live with their wives and
familyes att Cadiz and are both Spaniards borne and so accounted

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.651r Annotate
The twentyeth day of March 1653

The Clayme of John Scothering)
Senator of Hamburgh and)
others for their goods in the Peter)
whereof Mathias Cornelison)
was Master)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers.

2.

John Leemquell of the parish of Saint Michaels
Crooked Lane London merchant aged 37.
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

Leemquell d:t

To the 1. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
John Scrothering (whom this deponent hath knowne for this
twenty yeares) is a Senator and Counsellor of that Citty of Hamburgh and is
a Great dealer and trader in sundry merchandizes in Italy
Germany Spaine ffrance and England and hath his Agents
and Correspondents in those places to whom he sends goods
and merchandizes for returnes to be made to him for his owne
accompt. which he knoweth for that he is a Correspondent of
the sayd John Scrothering and so hath bene for theis four
yeares now last past, And for a merchant of great trade
the sayd John Scrothering is commonly accounted reputed and taken.
And otherwise he cannot depose

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
John Scrotheringe mongst others with whom he dealeth abroad
doth correspond in the way of trade with the arlate Tobias Zollicoffers
(who is by repute Consull for the Hansa townes of Germany att
Marsellis) and other of the Zollicoffers being of the house
of and kinne of the sayd Tobias, which this deponent knoweth
being the Correspondent aswell of the sayd Zollicoffers as sayd Scrothering
And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the third arle of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in or about
the monethes of September or October last past 1653. the sayd Tobias
Zollicoffers did take to freight the arlate ship the Saint Peter then
lyeing neere Tholoone to goe from thence to Hamburgh with a
lading of goods for accompt of the sayd John Scrothering
that having freighted the same he did about the same tyme lade
on board the sayd shipp (having obteyned liberty as should seeme
from the sayd Scrothering to freight part of her for himselfe) for
accompt of the sayd John Scrothering of Hamburgh and
himselfe the sayd Tobias Zollicoffers att or neere Tholoone
the severall goods and merchandizes following. That is to say
401. great and 193 small Karatells (sic) of Currants. 147 baggs
of Currants, seventy five baggs of Allmonds. 20 quarteels
of Capers, and one bale of verdigreaze to be in the sayd
shipp transported to Hamburgh for accompt and Advantage of
of (sic) the sayd John Scrothering and sayd Zollicoffers, which he deposeth
for that by a lettere dated att Hamburgh 27th September 1653. which
came to this deponents hands 14 Octobris .1653. and by another letter
dated 25 Octobr 1653 from Hamburgh which came to this deponents
hand .5th. Novembris .1653. and by a third lettere dated 8th Novembris
1653. which came to this deponents hands 17th. Novembris 1653. all
sent by the sayd John Screthering, he the sayd Screthering did certify
his
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.651v Annotate
this deponent as his Correspondent of the truth of the premisses
videlicet in the first of them he did give advise of the freighting of
the sayd shipp in manner as aforesd in the second, of the beginning [?XXX] take in
and ladeing the sayd goods for accompt aforesayd, and consigning
them as a foresayd, and in the third of the particular quantities of
the says goods; and the ladeing of the same did likewise appeare to this
deponent by a bill of lading which came to this deponents
hands in a letter from the sayd John Scrothering, and also
by the Confession of the sayd Mathias Cornelison who did
acquaint this deponent that he receaved the sayd goods on board the
said shipp att Tholone, many of which this deponent hath seene since
their inlading att this Port of London And further cannot depose

To the fourth article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that having
taken a view of a good part of the sayd goods in the warehowses
wherein the same are disposed since their unlading att this
port he findeth that they are marked with the marke in the
margent which was and is the usuall marke of the sayd John
Scrothering the same standing for and being the first letter
of his Christen name and surname, and as such commonly
held and understood by such as Correspond with the sayd
John Scrothering, and are acquainted with his manner of dealing
and further he cannot depose

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by a lettere
from the arlate (Paulus Langerman dated from Hamburgh
8:° Novembris. 1653. which came to this deponents hands here in
London 18 . Novembris 1653. the sayd Pauly Langerman did
advise this deponent that the foresayd Zollicoffers had about
the moneth of October 1653 laden on board the sayd shipp the
Saint Peter att Toloone for accompt of him the sayd Langerman one Chest
of Storax (being a phisicall drug and marked 'P L A')
to be transported to Hamburgh and there delivered for like
accompt. And further otherwise he cannot depose saving
that the syd marke is used to signify the name of the sayd
Paulus Langerman who was and is a merchant of good
quality and Burgher of Hamburgh and one that tradeth to
foreigne parts.

To the 6th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by
fame and report the family of the Zollicoffers are Switzers
and mannage severall factories in Common att Marseilles
and in Spaine and Italy; and the arlate Tobias Zollicoffer
the lader of the goods in question, but in the name of Joachim Lawrence
and David Zollicoffers (a thing usuall with that family) is the Consull
for the hansa Tobias resideing att Marseillis. and the same or
the like effect appeares to be true by a Certificat sent to this deponent under the
hands and seales of John ?Howorth (OR Alworth), Jordan ffairfax and
William Jackson English merchants residing att Marsellis
who likewise particulaly certify that the sayd Zollicoffers doe most
of the business there for accompt of Hamburgh merchants, and
that they did lade severall quantityes of Currants aboard the
shipp Saint Peter about October last past; which Certificat being
reall and not false or feigned and having come to this deponents hands
in
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.652r Annotate
in a letter of advise form Marsellis he know
leaveth in the Registry of this Court for the better information
thereof, referring himselfe to the same touching the particular
Contents thereof. And further cannot depose saving that
by like Common fame the sayd Zollicoffers have their families
in Zwitzerland and reside in ffrance and elswhere onely as
merchants strangers and under noe other quality.

To the seventh article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the foresaid
Matthias Cornelison upon his first arrivall here did acquaint
this deponent, that he the sayd Cornelison had order from the arlate
Tobias Zollicoffers the lader of the said goods that in case the
River of the Elve were frozen so as he could not gett thither he
should goe with the sayd goods to Dunkerke or Ostend and
there deliver the same to such as should have order to receyve
them from the sayd John Scothering. And otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the 8th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the foresayd
letter of 8. Novembris 1653. which came to this deponents hands
17th of the same moneth as aforesaid, the arlate John Scothering
did advise this deponent of the lading of the sayd goods, and of their
coming for Hamburgh, and that the skipper in case the Elve
should be frozen was ordered for Dunkerke or Ostend, and that
he had taken care that John Baptista Cattawbi of Antwerpe
in case the shipp should come to fflanders should receyve the sayd goods.
And saith that in the said letter of advise the producent did desire
this deponent in case he could heare that the sayd vessell were arrived
or should arrive in fflanders, then to procure a license if it might
be for the bringing and selling of the sayd Currants or some
opart thereof att this port of London, and to write to the sayd Cornelison
and John Baptista Cattawni to that effect for the bringing
the sayd Currants hither upon such license onteyned, And upon the
bringing up of the sayd Currants to this Port, ordered this deponent
to sell the same for accompt of the producent and sayd Zollicoffers
and to remitt the proceed thereof videlicet 1/2 to the sayd producent
to Hamburgh and the other 1/2 to the sayd Zollicoffers. And
further cannot depose saving he saith by vertue of his oath that
he did receyve the foresayd letter of advise here in London from the
producents att Hamburgh upon the 17th day of November 1653. last
past and before the seizure in question.

To the ninth article of the sayd alegation This deponent saith that It appeareth
to this deponent by severall papers extracted out of the Court of Admiralty
att Tolone and sent to this deponent in letters of advise from
Marseille as and for true extracts, that the sayd Currants before
their lading into the sayd vessell the Peter were taken att sea
in the shippe the great Turke alias the Hope
by the Knights of Malta and brought in to Toloone, and there
adiudged prize; And by advises from
Marseilles doth likewise understand that the sayd Zollicoffers
bought the same after their condemnation for accompt of the
sayd John Scothering and themselves the sayd Zollicoffers
who afterwards laded the same on board the sayd shipp for like accompt
And further saving as aforesayd cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.653r Annotate
The 21st day of March 1653

The Clayme of Thomas ffincham)
Edward Young and ffrancis Young all of this Citty)
of London merchants for the foods being ffrench)
wynes and vinegar lately seized in the shipp)
called the Statehowse of Emden of which Garret)
Johnson master lately seized by some of the shipps)
of this Commonwealth. Suckley Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of
the sayd Claymers

Rp.

William Cary of Marke lane London
merchant aged 35 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate Thomas
ffincham Edward Young and ffrancis Young are merchants of
this Citty and here doe inhabite and doe usually trade to ffrance
and that the arlate Samuel Berryman now Resident att Rochell
is an Englishman and factor and Correspondent of the producent
and resides att Rochell as a merchant stranger and factor and is
a Bachilor and for and as such commonly accounted reputed and
taken which he knoweth for that he hath goo and familiar
acquaintance with the producents, and being himselfe a merchant
understands well their manner of trade to ffrance, and hath
Correspondence with the sayd Beryman. And otherwise cannot
depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.655r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

The same day

Examined upon the alleagtion

2)

Zacharias Mielde of Hamburgh mariner master
of the sayd shipp the Saint Anthony aged 26 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.655v Annotate
To the 1 article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in or about the
moneth of August last past the arlate Dirrick de Dobeler Jurian
Vlkins Rodolph Berenbergh and others all merchants of Hamburgh
did freight the sayd shipp the Saint Anthony to goe from Hamburgh to
Burdeaux to lade wines and other goods for their accompts and
to returne againe to Hamburgh with the same and saith that the
sayd vessell in her outwards voyage was taken by the Elizabeth
frigot in the service of this Commonwealth amongst the ffleet of
Empty Hamburgh vessells that were taken about Michaelmas last
past, and was afterwards Cleared by order of the right honourable
the Counsell of State which hee knoweth being Master of the saud shipp
And otherwise cannot depose

To the second article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that by the letters
and writings found on board the sayd shipp at the tyme of her seizure
in her outward voyage that the sayd Dirick de Dobler and others of
Hamburgh had by their letters given order for the lading of the
sayd shipp with wynes and prunes for accompt of the sayd Dirick
de Dobler and others of Hamburgh, and that the sayd shipp was to
returne with the same to Hamburgh (as in truth she was and is) and
to noe other port or place. And saith that the sayd Dirick de Dobler
Jurian Vlikins and others the sayd merchants of Hamburgh did
remitt moneyes by bills of exchange from Hamburgh to ffrance
for the moor doing and payeing for the sayd wynes and prunes to be
laden on board the sayd shipp before this deponent came from
Hamburgh, and somuch the sayd Dirrick de Dobler and
sayd Vlkyn did acquaint this  deponent att Hamburgh. and he this
deponent after his arrivall in ffrance did see the sayd bills of exchange
in the hands of severall merchants att Bordeaux, who did acknowledge
that they received the same from the producents to and for the purpose
aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 3th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the wines and prunes
now seized doe really and truly belong to the sayd Dirick de Dobler and
others merchants Inhabitants of Hamburgh and to noe other persons
they being provided and laden for their accompt onely. And saith
that  the Laders of the sayd wynes. videlicet Jasper Pell. the widow of
Abraham Bracooner John Wilkens or Willemson, Sekall [?CornXXXX]
and Company and John Van Palle were and are factors residing
att Burdeaux doeing busines for Hamburgh merchants and the
rest of the sayd Laders fflandrians and Brabanters about Antwerp
and so accounted. And saith that the arlate Derick de Dobeler Jurian
Vlkins and others the partyes to whoom the sayd goods are consigned
are merchants dwelling in Hamburgh that frequently [?travel ?to]
ffrance for ffrench wynes and other goods for their owne accompts
which he knoweth being a Burgher of Hamburgh and a Mariner
and being ymployed by them hath well observed their trade and [?dwelling]
And otherwise cannot depose

To


HCA 13/68 f.656r Annotate
[ADD DATA]

To the Crosse Interrogatories

To the .1. Interrogatory he saith he was on bord the sayd shipp att the tyme of
her seizure and was master of her and so hath bene for 11 monethes
or thereabouts. and was borne at Hamburgh under the ffree state thereof
and there hath lived all his tyme, and is owner of 1/16th part of
the sayd shipp, and of 8 hogsheads of wine, four peices of prunes
and twenty bushowes  of nutts. and 7 terces of vinegar. and
otherwise negatively saving that John Meelde the owner of the sayd shipp
is this Rendents father

To the 2 he saith he hath knowne the sayd shipp about 11 or 12 monethes and
saith she was built at Meyen in Holland, and the sayd Dirick de Dobler
Jurian Vlkin Rodolph Berenbergh Willem de Hertogh Wilkin Vreda
Albert Eylars Jan Eylars Barent Carpfanger John Melde Otto Paep and
this deponent who are all Hamburghers  and the present Owners of
the sayd shipp did buy the same about 11 monethes agoe att Amsterdam
of and from Abraham Duncar, and a bill of sale was then
made to the sayd Owners thereof and delivered to this Rendent for
the use of his Common Owners. and otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]


HCA 13/68 f.656v Annotate
[ADD DATA]

----

Examined upon the sayd allegation

'Thomas Creswell' of Seacole Lane London Pewterer
formerly Trumpeter on board the sayd shipp the
Mayflower aged 21. yeares or thereabouts a 
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]


HCA 13/68 f.658r Annotate
'B. 8'

The 24th day of ffebruary 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

'3'

'Mathew Southwell' of Ipswich in the County of
Suffolk Mariner ;late Master of the sayd shipp the
Satisfaction aged 64 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposetha nd saith as
followeth. videlicet.

To the first second and third articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that being att Dantzick in the moneth of May 1652 He then and
there bought the arlate shipp the Satisfaction of Cornelius Paterson
Clinker the then master of her for 1575 guilders first penny
which summe this deponent did really pay to the sayd Clinker and the
most of in Suckats and afterwards expended neer about 200 li
sterling in the rigging fitting and furnishing the sayd shipp all for
his owne use and accompt and thereby then became and ever
sithence hath bene and still is and ought to be the Owner and proprietor
of the sayd shipp her tackle and furniture. And having so fitted her
this deponent sayled her under his owne conduct as master of
her from Dantzick to Riga in the month of June 1652. And
then and there he this deponent for his owne use did provide and
buy afterward for his owne accompt, lade on board the sayd shipp the
severall sorts and quantityes of goods hereafter mentioned which
were worth and were about that tyme commonly here in England
sold for the repective prices here sett forth. to say. 29. C. of
Clapboard worth .6. li per C making in the whole 174 li sterling and
forty wainscotts worth 25 s per wainscott being in all 50 li sterling
and 12 spruce deales worth 6 s a peice in all 3 li 12 s. And
this deponent had Cloathes Instruments and necessaries on board the
sayd shipp of the cleare value of 60. li sterling. And saith that the
Mariners of the sayd shipp (besides this deponents Interest aforesayd)
had Cloathes bedding and necessaries on board the sayd shipp
worth 70. li sterling att the least. and an adventure of goods
being 60 hundred weight and upwards of linnen yarne. 16.
Matts of fine Losney flax 2 last of loose flax in small bundles
Clapboard wainscot and some linnen Cloath and other things of
the value of 420. li sterling or thereabouts which the sayd Mariners
did lade for their owne accompt.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.658v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 24th day of february 1653.

On behalfe of Philip)
Noyes touching the shipp)
Plough)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

4)

Mathew Southwell of Ipswich in the County of
Suffolk Mariner aged 34 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.659v Annotate
The 25th day of ffebruary 1653

Prince against the ship)
the Chaitye)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3)

Thomas Brookes of Saint Swithins parish London
Mariner late master of the James frigot in the
service of this Commonwealth. aged 39 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.660r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 25th day of ffebruary 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2d9.

'Mathew Burt of Tower hill London
Mariner late Gunner of the sayd shipp the Mary
Ann ahed 32 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.665r Annotate
The 28th day of ffebruary 1652

The Clayme of Hans Kleene and)
[?Xans] Skeele of Stralsound)
under the dominions of the queen)
of Sweden for the shipp called)
the Blackamore of which Martin)
Ranges is Master and the goods)
in the same being ffrench wynes)
lately seized by the Sneesing)
a privat Man of warr by color)
of a Commission of Marque or Reprizall)
granted to Captaine Isaack Phillips)
Suckly Smith.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe of the sayd Claymers.

Martin Ranges of Stralsund in
Pomerania master of the sayd shipp the
Blackamore aged 38 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.667v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The second day of March 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

2)

Michael Duncar of Stralsondt merchant
aged 29 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.668v Annotate
The second day of March 1653

Gilbert Keat against one sixteenth)
part of the shipp the Hanniball and her)
tackle furniture and apparrell belonging)
to Timothy Shory, and against one 16th)
part of whatsoever freight due for the)
same and against the sayd Timothy Shory)
in particular and all others in generall)
Smith)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Gilbert Keate

1.

Smith dt.

Gilbert Christopher of Limehouse
in the County of Middlesex mariner [?LeiXXXX]
of the sayd shipp Hanniball in the service
of this Commonwealth aged 29 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.669r Annotate
The second day of March 1653. [CENTRE HEADING]

On the behalfe of the heyres of)
[?Martin] Sauer  deceased late master of the)
shipp the Hope of Hamburgh)
and of the mariners of the sayd)
shipp for their goods in the same)
Suckly Smith.)

Examined upon an allegation given in and admitted in
the Acts of this Court on the behalfe of the sayd
Martin Suer and his sayd Mariners

Jurian Wittegrove of Ostell in the Bishoprick
of Bremen Mariner one of the Company of the sayd
shipp the Hope aged 29 yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.669v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The fourth day of March 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Suckley [?XXX] Cole dt.

2.

Tunis Ott of Ostell late belonging to the [?Bishoprick]
of Bremen now under the Crowne of Sweden Steersman
of the sayd shipp the Hope of Hamburg aged [?XX]
yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.671r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The seventh day of March &lt;ref&gt;.1653.&lt;/ref&gt; [CENTRE HEADING]

Gilbert Keat aforesayd against)
[?the] part of the shipp Hanniball)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

Smith dt.

3us.

George Turlervill of the parish of Saint Dunstan
in the East Merchant aged 72 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the 1. and 2. articles of the sayd allegation this deponent saith he cannot depose.

To the 3. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That in the yeares
1649. 1650. 1651. and 1652 and monethes therein respectively
concurring the arlate Timothy Sharpe was and att the present
is indebted to the arlate Gilbert Keat in the summe of four
hundred and twenty pounds eight shillings and seven pence
or thereabouts of lawfull money of England which sayd debt
did
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.671v Annotate
did and doth arise upon or by reason of severall quantities of
wares and merchandises sent to Lisboa and there receyved by
the sayd Timothy Sh[?u]ry upon and for accompt of the said Gilbert
Keat of which wares the sayd Sh[?u]ry hath not made a full accompt nor
made full returnes of the proceed thereof to the sayd Gilbert Keat
the premisses he knoweth to be true for that for and during
all the sayd tyme and for ten yeares before and upwards
he hath beene and still is the Booke keeper of the sayd Gilbert
Keat and hath from tyme to tyme for all the sayd tyme draw[?ne]
upp and kept the accompts of the producent. and having lately
consulted with the sayd producents bookes of Accompts and that upon a [?cleane ballance]
of accompts the sayd Timothy Sh[?u]ry doth stand indebted to the sayd
Gilbert Keat in the summe of moneyes above mentioned and
further cannot depose; saving that the foresayd debt so arising
doth likewise appeare to be due as aforesayd by the letters and Invoyces
sent from Lisboa to the sayd Gilbert Keat under the hand of the sayd
Timothy Sh[?u]ry which letters and Invoyces this deponent hath likewise
seene and perused

Geo: T[?urbereile] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----

The same day Examined upon the sayd allegation [CENTRE HEADING]

4.

Samuel Wastell of the parish of Saint Botolphs
without Bishopsgate London merchant aged 34 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet

To the 1. and 2. hee saith he cannot depose.

To the 3. article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the yeares
1647. 1648. 1649. 1650 1651. 1652. and monethes there in respectively
concurring the arlate Timonth Shory was and still is

[COMPLETE TRANSCRIPTION OF MANUSCRIPT PAGE]

Sam Wastell [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.672r Annotate
The 9th day of March 1653

A Busines of Examination of witnesses)
[XXXXXXXXX] perpetuall remembrance of the)
[XXXXXX] hereafter deduced moved)
and prosecuted on behalfe of John)
Gibbs Michael Castial and Nicholas)
Corsellys and Company owners)
of the shipp named the ffreetrade)
of London (whereof the sayd John)
Gibbs was Master) seized by the King)
of Portugall or his Order against)
[XXXX] et cetera Budd)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd John Gibbs and others.

Nicholas Williams of Redriffe in the
County of Surrey Mariner sometyme quarter Master
on board the said shipp ffreetrade aged 36 yeares
or thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

[?Peake dt.]

To the 1. and 2. articles of the said allegation This deponent saith that in the yeares of our
Lord 1648. and 1649. and before and cotinually since the arlate John
Gibbs Michael Castile Nicholas Corsellys and Company all Inhabitants
in or about this Citty of London were and att present are the true and
lawfull Owners of the arlate shipp the free trade of London whereof
the sayd John Gibbs was Master and of her tackle apparell and furniure
and gunns and other provisions belonging unto her and were in
the quiet and peaceable possession of the same, which this deponent
knoweth for that he did belong to the said shipp as one of her
Quartermasters from the first building of her by the foresayd
Owners, And saith that in or about the moneth of June 1649.
aforesd the sayd shipp free trade the said Gibbs then Master and this
deponent quarter Master on board he was and remained in the porte of
Lisbone, and was then and there by the order and authority of
the King of Portugall of the sight of this deponent
and to the use of the said King seized and sequestred and taken into
his service and in his service against the goodwill and likeing
of the sayd Owners and ymployers as a man of warr and for the
Careening of his other shipps for the space of three yeares by
reason whereof the sayd shipp receyved much dammage by worm eating
and otherwise but to what value he knoweth not. And further
cannot depose

To the third and fourth arles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
That att such tyme as the sayd shipp free trade now seized at Lisbone
as aforesd she was a strong and tight shipp and had bene but
one voyage before att sea from the tyme of her first building
and was of the burthen of .200 tonnes or thereabouts and had
in her sixteene gunnes, and the tackle apparell and furniture
of and belonging unto her were likewise good and new And the
freight of the sayd shipp so provided with gunns and tackle
was well worth the summe of 250: li sterling per moneth And
soe much was and is usually given per moneth for a shipp of her burthen
and goodnes. And he further saith that att such tyme as the
sayd shipp was seized there were in her provisions of victualls.
which were well worth the summe of 170: li sterling. And he saith
that the sayd shipp when she was restored was damnifyed (besides
the forementioned dammage in her hull) in her masts to the value of
10:li sterling. In her Cables and other Cordayge to the value of 40: li sterling.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.672v Annotate
In the Gunners store to the value of 50. li sterling. In her Carpenters
store to the value of [?.10] sterling and in her Boatswaynes store to
the value of 10. li sterling. And further that when the sayd shipp
was seized as aforesayd there did belong unto her a long boat
and a wherry with 18 oares which were utterly loste to the
Owners and were well worth 29. li sterling. The premisses he
knoweth being quarermaster in the sayd shipp and for the reasons aforesayd
And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 5th article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith That three did belonge
unto the sayd shipp 25 mariners besides the Master who had all of
them goods o board att the tyme of the sayd seizure for their
respective Accompts, and that the sayd goods belonging to the
sayd Mariners (not accompting the Masters losses) were worth and
did amount unto 300 li sterling att the least ober and besides the losses
of improvement thereof ever sithence and that the sayd Mariners
had Chests Cloathes Instruments bookes and other necessaries on board
to the value of 250 li sterling or thereabouts, all which were
likewise seized by the order of the sayd King and the sayd Mariners
utterly deprived thereof of the sight and certaine knowledge
of this deponent and further cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

Nicholas Willyams [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated before Doctor)
Godolphin and Doctor Clarke)
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.673r Annotate
The tenth day of March .1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

'8us'

'Captaine Gilbert Crane' of Saint Mary Magdalens parish in
Southwarke and County of Surrey Mariner aged
34 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the 1. and 2. Articles of the sayd allegation he saith he cannot depose

To the .2. 3. and 4th. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith
that being att New England [?XXXX XXXX] in the shipp the King David in the
immediat service of this Commonwealth whereof he was then Commannder
he did in or about in the month of August last past see a shipp there arrive in the harbour of Salem
and manned by English men the bottome whereof was Spanish or
Portuguese built and topp thereof Hollands built which shipp
was then called the Holy ghost having in her sterne the image
or represntation of a dove and a Crosse, which very shipp this
deponent hath since seene in the River of Thames in the possession
of Captaine Bredon as her owner. And saith that the foresayd English
Mariners who brought the sayd shipp into Salem Harbour did acquaint
this deponent there that they had taken and surprized the sayd
shipp att the Barbadoes taking an opportunity when many
of her Company were out of her, most of whom as they
sayd were Spaniards and Portugueses, and that they cutt her
Cables and turned such of her Company as they found on board
her into a ong boat and sent them to land and brought away the
sayd shipp and that they had bene once before with the sayd vessell
att 

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.674r Annotate
'B.9.'

The sixteenth day of March 1653

On the behalfe of Joachim)
Wichman, Jacob Martin)
and others Owners of the)
shipp the Saint George of)
Hamburgh whereof)
Jurian Schoemaker is)
Master and goods in the same now lyeing in)
the Downes Smith Suckly)

'Jurian Schoemaker' of Hamburg
Mariner Master of the sayd shipp the Saint George
of Hamburgh aged 39. yeares or thereabouts
sworne in Court before the Judges of
the High Court of Admiralty and examined
deposeth and saitha s followeth videlicet

[?vpr]

That the foresayd shipp the Saint George was and is a shipp belonging
to the Port and Citty of Hamburgh, and to merchants and others
there dwelling that is to say Joachim Wichman, Jacob Martin
Jurian Beckster Hendrick Momma, Augustin Hendrickson
Harman Hendrickson, the heyres of Philip Bonn the heyres
of Hans Van Holt, the widdow of Evart Ursenholt and
him this deponent, all which persons (the heyres of Hans Van Holt
excepted, who are young and natives of Hamburgh) for theis twenty
yeares last past and upwards have bene and now are Inhabitants of
Hamburgh and subiects of the ffree State thereof, and all of them
Burghers or Burghers Children of the same place, and for theis
eleven yeares last they and their Ancestors have bene, and themselves
now are the true sole and lawfull Owners of the sayd shipp and her
tackle apparell and furniture, they and their forefathers having built
the same eleven yeares agoe att their owne Costs and ever sithence
continued as now they are in the quiet possession thereof, by this deponent as
Master of her in their behalfe from the tyme of her first building
And saith that the sayd ship being bound for Rohan in ffrance tooke in
all her present ladinmg being peece goods att Hamburgh, the greatest
part of all which her lading did and doth belong to and was laden for
the sole and proper accompt and Adventure of merchants Burghers
and Inhabitants of Hamburgh and the remainder was laden for
accompt of and doth belong to merchants of free places in the Empire
and Sweden videlicet Leipzick Elbersell Hildedusen [?XXXX] Bremen Stockholm
and Emden, and that the sayd shipp having taken in her sayd
lading of peice goods sett sayle therewith under Comand and
Conduct of this deponent about eleven dayes now past from Hamburgh
and came and arrived in  the Downes about five dayes now past and
was and is bound to the Port of Rohan in ffrance there to make her
discharge of her sayd goods which are there to be delivered to the
factors and for the accompts of the merchants of Hamburgh Leipzick Elber felt and
other the free cities and places above mentioned for whose accompt
the same were laden as aforesayd. And that the sayd shipp after
full [de]livery made of the sayd goods att Rohan is to returne directly
to the Port and Citty of Hamburgh and to noe other Port or Place
And lastly saith that noe Hollander or ffrenchman, or any person
whatsoever subiect to the States of the United Provinces or King of
ffrance or any other Prince or State in hostility with this Commonwealth
of England had or hath any part share, or interest in the sayd shipp
or her lading or any part thereof.

Jürgen Schumaker [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.674v Annotate
On behalfe of Augustin)
Hendrickson and the widdow)
of Christopher Boy and)
others Owners of the shipp)
the Hope of Hamburgh)
whereof ffrederick Boy is)
Master now lyeing in the Downes)
and of the Owners of the goods)
laden on board her. Smith. Suckly.)

Frederick Boye of Hamburgh Mariner
Master of the sayd ship the Hope aged 27 yeares
or thereabouts sworne in Court before the
Judges of the High Court of Admiralty and
examined saith and deposeth as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]

Hamburgh for Rohan
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.675r Annotate
Christian Paul Santon of Saint Mary Hill
London merchant aged 37 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth. videlicet.

To ye .1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6th. articles of the sayd allegaconThis deponent saith
that being a Native of Embden he hath for theis 14 yeares last past
well knowne the arlate Egbert Evers one of the owners of the sayd
shipp the Stadthowse whereof Gerret Janson is master. and hath
good aquaintance and Correspondence with him and saith that upon
the 11th day of November last past he receyved a letter of advise from
the sayd Egbert Evars dated the 20th day of October 1653. and
the arlate schedule or attestacon therein now shewne to him, which
he saith is sealed with the usuall seale of Emden, and that upon
the 22th day of december last past he receyved another letter from ye sayd
Egbert Evars dated 6.o december .1653 and the arlate schedule
or copy or exemplar of the bill of sale of ye sayd shipp now shewne him therein. And
saith that in ye sayd letters and other advises receyved from him long
before the seizure now in question the sayd Egbert Evers did certify
this deponent that himselfe and freinds of Emden had lately bought the shipp
the Sradthowse Gert Janson aster (meaning ye shipp now in question)
in Hollnad, and that she was to goe to ffrance to seeke freight for some
free port, and that in regard that many shipps that passe to and
fro through ye English seas are seized by private or publike men
of war he did therefore send this deponent the sayd attestaccon
under the seale of Emden for ye sayd shipp and allso ye sayd Copy of the
bill of sale made to them in order to Cleare ye sayd shipp for
accompt of himselfe and freinds of Emden aforesayd in case  the same should happen to
be seized and brought into England. And further he cannot
depose saving that the 2 schedules annexed to ye sayd allegacon and bowe
shewne him were and are ye very attestaccon and copy of ye bill of sale so sent
to and receyved by this deponent as aforesayd

To ye Crosse Interrogatories

To the 1. he saith he was born at Emden under the Jurisdiction of the
Earle of East ffreizlan, and for theis ten yeares last past hath
lived with his family in this City of London. and hath noe relation
to ye Claymers nor any manner of Interest in the sayd shipp or
in any of her lading. And further otherwise then negatively he
cannot depose.

To ye 2. he saith he hath knowne the Interrate Garret Janson about
5 weekes and noe more, and hath heard that he hath lived for about
3 yeares now last past att Emden and that he is marryed there. And
otherwise he cannot depose

To ye 3. he saith that ye sayd shipp was built and bought at Euchusen
as this Rendent beleiveth. but he saw not any money payd for ye same
norwas he a witnes to ye bill of sale made for ye same, and
further cannot depose

(To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.675v Annotate
Daniel Skinner [LH MARGIN, AT NINETY DEGREES]

To the 5th. and 6th. he saith he knoweth nothing thereof saving that
the sayd Janoch Yelleverston is an Inhabitant of Amsterdam

To the 6 (sic). he saith he knoweth nothing thereof saving that he hath
not bene att Emden since the sayd shipp was brought.

To the eighth he saith that he did receyve the foresayd attestation
and bill of sale in this Citty of London, and that the same were
sent from Emden in letters written by the sayd Egbert Evers
who was and is a Burgher and Inhabitant of Emden. And
further to this interrogatory he cannot depose.

[?XXXX XXXX XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The 16th day of March 1653

On the behalfe of Howard Mole)
and Company Imployers of)
the shipp the Thomas whereof)
the sayd Mole is Captaine)
against the shipp the ffortune)
whereof Richard Allen is)
Master. Smith)

Examined upon Certaine Interrogatories
on the behalfe of the sayd Howard Mole and
Company.

1

George Bell of Lithgow in Scotland
merchant aged twenty one yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the first Interrogatory he saith he knoweth well the Interrate shipp
the ffortune and so hath done for theise twelve monethes last past
and saith that she doth now belong to the Port of Boristone
in Scotland under the Jurisdiction or Command of the Lord Protector of this
Commonwealth and saith that George Maione and Marcas [?XXX]
and this deponent all Scotchmen and subiects of this Commonwealth are Owners of
her and so have bene for about 12 monethes last past

[ADD DATA]

The same day Examined upon the sayd Interrogatoryes

2)

Marcus Mooet of [BLANK IN MANUSCRIPT] [?CXXXXX]
Merchant aged 29. yeares or thereabouts
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.676r Annotate
To the 1st Interrogatory he saith that he doth very well knowe the shipp
the ffortune Interrate and so hath done for theis 12 monethes now
last past, for and during all which tyme she hath belonged
and now doth belong to the Port of Boristhernesse in Scotland
two miles from Lithgow, And saith that George Mayne
and George Ball of Lithgow and this deponent all Scotchmen
and subiects of this Commonswealth were and are the true and
lawfull owners thereof and so have bene for about a yeare
now past which he knoweth for that they bought the same of and
from Mr Cheisly and Mr Barklet merchants of Edinburgh
the former Owners thereof, And further cannot depose not
knowing where the sayd shipp was built.

To the 2. he saith that the lading of the sayd shipp is sope tufted
hollands druggs and onion seades, which were laden in
the sayd shipp for accompt of George Ball of Lithgow
and one Mr Ball of Glasgow, and one other of Lithgow
whose name he remembreth not and him this deponent, to
be transported to Leith of Scotland. And saith that the sayd
vessell was seized upon the open seas by the Interrate [?Mole]
and was when she was so seized bound to Leith aforesayd
And otherwise he cannot depose

[?Markus] [?Modt] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The sixteenth day of March 1653.

The Clayme of Danyel Skinner)
of dover for thirty five tonnes)
of wyne in the Usedome of which)
Pasque Alberts is Master lately seized)
by some of the shipps of this)
Commonwealth Suckly Budd.)

1us.

Pasqual Albrechts of Stockholme in
Swethland Mariner Master of the sayd shipp
the Usedome aged 33 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1st article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that for theis 16
monethes last past he hath well knowne the arlate Danel Skinner
for and during all which tyme, and for severall yeares before
as the arlate John Vanpalle did acquaint this deponent att
Burdeaux he the sayd producent hath bene and is a great trader
to ffrance for wynes and other goods having severall effects in
the hands of the sayd Vanpalle who was and is the factor of the sayd
Skinner and sent about a yeare agoe 60 barrells of herrings for his owne accompt [###]

[###] To the sayd Jan Van
[?dadd] by him tisdeponent who did
deliver the same
to the sayd Van Pulle
for like accompt.

which Vanpulle is a fflandrian borne and formerly
lived with his wife att Antwerpe where thsi deponent first [?cause]
came to know him about 7 or 8 yeares agoe and saith he now
resides att Burdeaux as a factor and merchant stranger
for and as such the sayd persons were and are commonly
accounted reputed and taken. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 2d article of the sayd allegation and the three schedules therein
mentioned annexd to the sayd allegation and now shewed to and perused by
him, he saith an deposeth that one of the sayd schedules being a bill
of lading was and is one of the originall bills of lading for
the
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.677r Annotate
To the 3d. Interrogatory he saith that the foresayd John Van palle att
and neere Burdeaux bout the moneth of October last past did
in this deponents presence buy severall great quantityes of wyne
whereof the wyne now Claymed is a part, of and from severall
Boores that brought the same to sell whose names he knoweth not and
to which Boores this Rendent saw  the sayd Van Palle pay ready
moneyes for the sayd wynes. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith he verily veleiveth that the wines now Claymed
doe really belong to the foresayd Mr Skinner who was and is an
Englishman and that noe subiect of the States of the United
Provinces nor of the ffrench King have any interest
therein, for the sayd Van Palle did acquaint him lodging in
his howse as aforesayd that the sayd wines were really bought and laden
for the sayd Mr Skinner and further or otherwise than negatively
he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]

...and he hath told this Rendent that he did
usually in the vintage tyme come overland from Anwerpe to
Burdeaux to provide wynes for his freinds and Correspondents, but
whethe rhe trade for himselfe or not this Rendent knoweth not
And otherwise he cannot depose.

[ADD DATA]
----
The seventeenth day of March .1653.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.678v Annotate
The seventeenth day of March 1653

The Clayme of dederick [?dreeling]&amp;#124;)
Hans [?Cromckembergh] and others)
of Riga subiects of the Queen)
of Sweden for the Vessell)
called the Armes of Riga of)
which Cornelius Peterson is)
Master and the tackle and furniture)
lately seized by some of the)
shipps of this Commonwealth)
Suckley Budd.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Claymers.

'Cornelius Peterson' of Riga in
Lyftlandt Mariner Master of the sayd
shipp the Armes of Riga aged twenty
six yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and
saieth as followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.682r Annotate
live att Rochell but whether they are hous keepers and pay
taxes and [X]tributions hee knoweth not.

To the 8th he saith he did not receyve any part of his freight in [XXXX GUTTER]
but was to receyve the same att dunkirke of the merchants
there to who the same goods were consigned upon the
delivery thereof if the said vessell had not bene taken.

To the 9th he referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition and
other wise cannot depose./

Jan [?S]end[XX]ck [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The XXXth day of March 1653.

The Clayme of Daniel Skynner)
of Dover for his wynes and)
in the usddome./)

Examined upon the said allegation

(2.)

Albertus Skinner of Saint George Botolphs
parish London merchant aged 30 yeares or
Thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined
deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first articles of the said allegation This deponent saith that for divers
yeares now last past the arlate Daniel Skynner hath bene an
usuall trader to france for wines and other goods, and that
the arlate John Vanputte is his factor and presides att Bordeaux
and is commonly accounted a fflandrian and does busines att
Bourdeaux as a factor and for a factor is commonly accounted the
premisses he knoweth being the brother of the producent and knowing
well that the sayd Vanputte was the factor of this deponents
father who used the same trade to ffrance that the arlate
Daniel Skinner now doth. And otherwise cannot depose.

To the 2d article of the sayd allegation and the three schedules thereunto annexed
this deponent saith that the said schedules were sent to this deponent
from the arlate Daniel Skinner as and for the true and
originall letter of advise factory and bill of lading for
the thirty five tonnes of wynes now in question, and this
deponent doth beleive that they are true and reall and the
Contents hereof so had and done as herein is conteyned
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the third article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
Daniel Skinner by his letter of the tenth of December 1653 last
past which came to this examinates hands here in London about 11 or 12. day
of the same moneth did acquaint him this deponent that he had
thirty five tonnes of wynes comeing from Bourdeaux into the English Channell
in a Swedish shipp the Usddome of Stockholme and that
the same were consigned for Dunkirke, but that he had
a desire to have the same disposed of att London and heretofore
desired this deponent to make and use meanes for a license
for bringing the same to London if it might be, or to procure
the same to be [XXXXX] by the officers of the Customs house, but
desired this deponent to use all expedition for that a convoy was
attending in the downes to [?waft] severall shipps for Dunkirke in which
noe doubt the said the Master of the Usddome would goe to his designed [XXX]
And further cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.682v Annotate
To the fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate
Vanp[?ulle] the factor of the sayd Daniell Skinner doth usually draw
the money for such wines and goods as he ladeth for the sayd
Daniel Skinner when he hath not effects in his hands upon Mr
[?Wildego[?os]e] of Paris, who is a correspondent of this deponent
who since November last past hath payd accepted and remitted
the summe of 4006 Crownes and upwards all for accompt
of the said Daniel Skinner part drawne upon this deponent
by the said Wil[?degoose], and part remitted to him by this deponent
And more particularly saith that the 22th day of December last
past he this deponent did here at London accept a bill of exchange
of 800 Crownes drawne by the sayd Mr Wildegoose and dated
from Paris 20th of decemb. 1653. new stile for accompt of
the sayd Daniel Skinner and the sayd Daniel hath acquainted this deponent
that the sayd 800 Crownes so drawne by the sayd Mr Wildegoose
had bene formerly drawne by the sayd Van[?pulen] upon the sayd
Wildegoose for the wyne now in question. And otherwise he
cannot depose.

To the 5th article hee saith his foregoeing deposicon is true

To the Cross Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. Interrogatory he saith he was borne att Antwerpe under the
Jurisdiction of the King of Spain. and hath lived for theis five
yeares last past in London. and about 2 yeares next before at
[?Hull[?X]. and for three yeares next before att Dover and is a
Bachelor, and is brother of the producent.
and further otherwise than negatively cannot depose.

To the 2. hee saith he knoweth not Vann[?pulle] a foresayd by sight but
by fame hath knowne him severall yeares. and by like fame
hath heard he is a marryed man and keepes howse in Bordeaux
and further cannot depose.

To the 3d he saith he was not present att the buying of the sayd wines
and further cannot depose saving that hee this Rendent upon
the 14th day of ffebruary last past did here in London pay the 800
Crownes aforesayd to be for the sayd wynes, to Mr John Ashurst the [XX]
A[XX] younger And further cannot depose.

To the 4th negatively to every pt thereof.

To the 5th saith the sayd wynes are of the growth of ffrance and were
as he beleiveth laden att Burdeaux. and otherwise he cannot
depose.

To the 6th he hath heard that the sayd Van [?pulle] hath lived in
ffrance a good space of tyme but how long in certayne
knoweth not nor hath heard. and further cannot depose

To the 7th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof

Albertus Skynner [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.683r Annotate
The 23th day of March 1653

Examined upon Certaine Interrogatories on the behalfe
of the sayd John Hallet.

1)

George Hanger of Thredneedlestreet London merchant
aged thirty nine yeares or thereabouts a witnes
swornein the high Court of Admiralty and Examined deposeth
and saith as followeth videlicet.

[ADD DATA]

To he 6. Interrogatory This deponent saith that he hath seene and persed
a letter written and sent from the Interrate Charles Longland Agent
for this Commonwealth att Legorne and directed to Mr John Hallett
merchant of London (being John Hallet interogat) wherein the
sayd Charles Longland did and doth Certify the sayd John Hallet
touching the seizure of the shipp Dragon of London (being the shipp
interrate as he conceyveth) neer to Leghorne by the Dutch. And saith
the paper or writing now shewne him bearing the forme of a letter
and signed att the foot thereof Charles Longland and Jonathan
Parker was and is the foresayd letter sent by the sayd Mr Longland to the
sayd John Hallet in whose hands this deponent first saw the same

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.686v Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 23th day of March 1653.

A Busines of Examination of witnesses on the part and behalf)
of Thomas Hewell Master and Lader of the goods wares and)
merchandizes aboard a Certaine shipp called the Civill)
Society of London hereafter mentioned in this allegation with)
shipps lading was seized by the King of ffrance or his)
Ministers or subiects att the Port of Coracus alias the)
Lagara promoted by the sayd Thomas Hewel against all or)
any persons or person that will justify the sayd seizure.)
Clements.)

Examined upon an allegation on the behalfe
of the sayd Thomas Hewil.

1.

Thomas Minshall of Shadwell in the
County of Middlesex Mariner late Boatswaine
of the sayd shipp the Civill Society aged
40 yearess or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith
as followeth. videlicet.

To the first articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that in the monethes of
March. Aprill. May June and July 1651. the arlate Thomas Hewil
was master of the arlate shippe the Civill Society and lawfull owner
and so still ought to be of the severall goods and merchandizes
hereafter particularly mentioned, And saith that the sayd shipp within
the sayd tyme being designed upon a voyage to the West Indies from this port
of London under conduct of the sayd Hewil as Master of her and this deponent
as her boateswayne arrived safely att Caracas alias La Lagara in
the sayd Indies n the moneth of July 1651 neere about the beginning
of the sayd moneth. which he knoweth being Boatswaine of her as aforesayd
And otherwise hee cannot depose.

To the 3d article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that upon the arrivall of
the sayd shipp at Coracus alias Lagara the arlate Thomas Hewit
did there and place neere there to did [?XX] provide and lade on board the sayd shipp the severall goods and
[?XXXX]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.690r Annotate
'Colonel James Heane' Governor of the Isle
of Jersey aged 42. yeares or thereabouts a
witnes sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth. videlicet.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.691r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The 27th day of ffebruary 1653.

The Clayme of Thomas Mills and)
others of Portsmouth for the shipp)
called the Amity of which John)
Duvall is Master formerly)
called the Martin and her)
tackle and furniture and the)
goods in the same being wynes)
Iron potts and bottles lately seized)
in the shipp the Amity att or neere)
Portsmouth Suckly Budd)

.1.

Suckly dt.

John Duval of Newhaven in ffrance Mariner
Master of the sayd shipp the Amity aged 26 yeares or
thereabouts a witnes sworne and examined deposeth
and saith as followeth. videlicet.

To the 5 article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that i or about
the moneth of June last past this deponent arrived in ffrance from
the West Indies where he had bene for 16 monethes or thereabouts
next before, and arrived at Nantes in ffrance and there continued
till october last past and about the latter end of october or beginning
of November last past came overland from Nantes to Newhaven
and then and there found the sayd shipp the Amity laden and ready to sett
sayle. And saith that the arlate Beniamin Duvall did then putt
and appoynt him this deponent being the arlate John Du Vall Master of
the sayd vessell, and have him charge of the same but did not
declare or discover to this deponent or any of his Company so farr as 
he knoweth that the sayd Mr mills or any English men had any Interest
in the lading of the sayd shipp But saith that the bill of lading for the sayd lading was made
in the names of himselfe the sayd Beniamin du Vall and Nicholas Pellitier
and Jacob le [?Bargh]. by reason whereof this deponent did conceyve
that the sayd lading did belong to the sayd Duvall. Pellitier and le Bargh
howbeit he saith by vertue that the sayd wines and goods were theirs but by the sayd
bill of lading, And saith that he was examined att Portsmouth
and then declared that he did not know for whose accompt the sayd
wynes or goods were otherwise than by the sayd bill of lading
but aving but an imperfect understanding of the English language
he knoweth not what was there putt downe in his examination And
otherwise cannot depose.
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.694r Annotate
arrived in the sayd moneth of November 1653. And further saith
that the sayd Collonel Heane the Governor aforesayd did before this deponents
departure from Jersey videlicet in the moneth of October 1653 graunt
a passe unto this deponent to Brittany in ffrance, which passe
(being the second schedule in the sayd allegation annexed and now
shewne to and perused by this deponent in whose sight the sayd
Collonel Heane signed the same) was really granted made and
signed by the sayd Collonel Heane who was and is the Governor
of Jerset and so accounted. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 9th

[ADD DATA]

To the 10th

[ADD DATA]

To the last he saith his depositions are true.

To the Crosse Interrogatories.

To the 1. he saith he comes to be a witnes in this ause att the request
of Leiutenant Underwood, and saith he is Owner of one halfe of
the lading of the sayd shipp

To the 2. he saith the sayd barke was English built and first seene by this
deponent in Jersey. and saith he saw her not after she was takenby Captaine Lockier.

To the .3. he saith

[ADD DATA]

To the 4th

[ADD DATA]

To the 5th he saith the foresayd wine and goods were of the grweth of ffrance
and laden att Nantes where this Rendent saw them in the possession
of ffrenchmen, subiects of the ffrench King videlicet att the tyme the sayd Rendent
bought the same
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.695r Annotate
[ADD DATA]
----
The .1. day of March 1653.

The Lord Protector)
against the Land of Promise)

Examined upon the sayd allegation

3)

Smith dt.

Thomas de Lavall of Dover in the County of Kent
merchant aged 35 yeares or thereabouts a witnes
sworne and examined deposeth and saith as
followeth videlicet.

To the sayd allegation and severall Articles therein This deponent saith
That in this last summer the particular tyme he remembreth not
he saw the arlate Christian de Conynck arrive att Dover
with his man of warr or shallopp the Three Kings of Dunkirke
and the arlate shipp the Land of promise which sayd shipp Land
of promise and her lading, the sayd de Coninck as himselfe
and Company then sayd, had some few dayes before taken att sea in
her Course for ffrance by vertue of a Comission of marque against
the ffrench
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.698r Annotate
Sarah, three of which Sarahs Company were taken into the sayd
Man of warr and the sayd Lockyer have order to carry the Sarah to
England, and accordingly the Sarah shaped a Course thitherward
And further he cannot depose.

To the 10th and 11th he saith that the sayd vessell in he Course for England
did meet with a storme and  was cast away in that storme
and all the sayd Lockiers men that were in her were drowned
but saith the sayd shipp was not cast away by the violence of
the storme but the unskilfullnes of the sayd Lockiers men none
of whome one man excepted could or did mannagge the sayles
or doe any other necessary worke in such a case, one of the sayd Lockiers
men being a land souldier and [?XXX] and 2 more boyes unable to worke in a storme
and the 4th who did assist was an impotent old man that wanted
strength requisit in such a case: and saith that in case the sayd
persons had beene skillfull and sufficient seamen the sayd barke
and lading might easily have made to Land and bene
preserved. And further he cannot depose saving that this deponent
and the sayd old man did their best endeavour to preserve the
sayd vessell ad her lading aforesayd.

[?MXXstack] [INTERPRETER?, LH SIDE]

Tomas [XX CXXXz] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE)
----
The third day of March . 1653

Examined upon the sayd allegation

On behalfe of the sayd)
Gilbert Keat)
against a 16th part)
of the Hanniball)

Smith dt.

2

Richard Beare of Gravesend merchant aged
60 yeares a witnes sworne and examined
deposed and saith as followeth videlicet.

To the 1 and 2. articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
in the yeares 1647. 1648. 1649. 1650. 1651. 1652. and monethes
therein respectively concurring the arlate Timothy Sharpe
was and att present is Owner and proprietor of one
sixteenth part of the sayd shipp the Hanniball and of 1/16th part
of her tackle furnitire and apparell and so accounted the
premisses he knoweth to be true for that during all the sayd tyme
he had bene and is a partowner of the said shipp himselfe and knoweth
that the sayd Shory did occasion the building of her in the yeare 1647. for
Captaine [?Tatham] the first Master of her and that he did contribute to
the building and setting forth of 1/16th part of her and her tackle
and that in or aboutthe yeare 1648 a dividend of the sayd shipps
profitts was made at Lisboa where the sayd Shory and this deponent
att that tyme both were, the sayd shipp being then there likewise
and that the sayd Shory as owner of 1/16 part of her as aforesd did
then receyve his proportion of the sayd Dividend, and hath ever
sithence continued Proprietor of the sayd 16th part of the
sayd shipp and for such hath bene and is accounted by this deponent
and other the Owners thereof and others that know the sayd shipp
and the Interest of her right Owners therein And further cannot
depose.

To the 3. and fourth [?XXXX]. he cannot depose saving as aforesayd

Richard Bere [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.698v Annotate
D.1.

Conrad de Briel)
and Company for the)
Santo Spirito)

The 3d day of March 1653.

The foresaid Antonio de Ponte to the Crosse Interrogatories 
brought in 3d March 1653.

To the 1. he saith he cometh to be a witnes att the desire ofAnthonio
Rodriguez Roblez. and as to the property and identity of the sayd
shipp Spirito Santo he referreth him selfe to his foregoeing
depositions and further cannot depose.

To the .2. he saith he knoweth not that the name of the sayd shipp
is written in dutch that being a language not understood by him.
and being not att the Barbadoes with the sayd shipp knoweth not what
papers were on board her. and further referring himselfe
to his foregoeing depositions he cannot depose.

To the third he saith he never saw any Commission on board the sayd
shipp against the English nor doth he know beleive or hath heard any
such matter. And as touching his Religion he saith he is a Roman
Catholique, and holdeth himselfe bound as a Christian man to speak
the truth and nothing but the truth upon his Oath in any cause betwixt
the Spanairds and English, and holdeth the English in generall
to be Christians of the Church Catholique and Apostolique. and
as for the interrate [?yoo] and Bredon he knoweth them not. And
further cannot depose

To the 4th. he saith that not belonging to the sayd shipp the voyage
that she made when she came to the Barbadoes, he cannot depose
otherwise than as aforesayd.

Don Antonio [?XXXX]
Castillay Luz [?XXXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
----
The foresayd Anthonio Rodrigez
Roblez to the Interrogatories/

To the .1. he saith he comes to declare his knowledge in this cause
of himselfe as one looking after this busines on behalfe of the
sayd Conrad de Briel

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.699r Annotate
The foresayd Diego Rodrigues Arias
To the foresayd Interrogatories

To the .1. he saith he was spoken to by Anthonio Rodrigo Roblez his Contest
to appaerare and give testimony in this Cause. and saith he saw not
the ayd ship bought, nor moneyes payd for the same and as touching her
propriety can say noe more than he hath above sett forth. and for
the identity of the shipp Spirito Santo with the shipp now in question he
referreth himselfe to his foregoeing deposition. and further cannot
depose.

[ADD DATA]

The foresayd John Thomas Melute
To the foresayd Interrogatories.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.699v Annotate
The sixth day of March 1654.

Conrado de Briel aforesaid)
pro nave the Spirito Santo)

Examined upon the sayd allegation.

7mus

Edmund Garnet of Stepney in the County of
Middlesex Mariner aged 21 yeares masters mate
of the shipp Paramor of London, a witnes sworne and 
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet.

being att the Iland of the Barbadoes

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.701r Annotate
the Importance of the sayd Kings service they would ggive to the sayd [?Dor]
[?ling] the [?XXX] and provisions which he desired and they did furnish
him with about 40 oxen and severall [?CarXXX] of Casava bread and [?XXX] [?XXX] for
releife of the sayd Negroes. And further that the sayd Governor caused the
sayd Pinke to be sent to Santa Domingo with the License and dispatches
aforesayd that the Governor of that place and the Kings Officers there
might allso peruse and approve them and give their alloweance
thereunto.

[ADD DATA]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.702r Annotate
Thomas Le Beir of the parish of Saint Mary
in the Isle of Jersey Mariner late Master
of the sayd shipp or Barke the Sarah aged
38 yeares or thereabouts a witnes sworne and
examined deposeth and saith as followeth videlicet

[ADD DATA]

Nantes

Jersey
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.703v Annotate
To the .3. he saith that he was sworne att ffoy and examined in
the English tongue which he very little understands or speakes
and the Commissioners and Notary, that did examined him did not
nor could speak ffrench so farr as he heard or beleiveth which
was and is his native language and the language spoken in Jersey
and saith he did refuse to sett his hand to his sayd examinatin
which a notary did write, not because he did understand that
any part thereof was contrary to his mind or truth, but because
he did not att all understand what was so writt downe having
never heard the same read to him, but saith that in case any
thing there be contrary to what in this his deposition is now
declared the same so farr as it is contrary is contrary to his
mynd and to the truth of the fact in this Cause

Tomas [?XXX] [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]

Repeated in Court)
before the Judges).
----
The seventh day of March 1653 [CENTRE HEADING]

The Clayme of James Pinquett)
merchant of Antwerpe for)
thirteene bales of linnen)
marked and numbred as in the)
margent taken out of a shipp)
called the Nightingale whereof)
Hendrick Glashogen was master)
by Captaine Badiley in the immediat)
service of this Commonwealth. Smith. Bud.)

Smith dt.

ffrancisco Boesdonck of Antwerpe
merchant aged 21 yeares or thereabouts
a witnes sworne and examined deposeth and
saith as followeth videlicet.

To the first article of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that the arlate James
Pinquet whom he hath well knowne for theis six yeares and upwards
was and is by common repute a fflandrian borne and for theis 6
yeares last past hath bene and now is an Inhabitant of
Antwerpe where he hath his wife and family att this present and
so hath had for theis six yeare last past of the certaine knowledge
of this deponent, who hath bene for all the sayd tyme his booke holder
and so is att this present, and thereby knoweth that he the sayd James Pincquet
for theis six yeares past hath driven a Constant trade from Roan
to Cadiz in Spaine with linnen Cloth and hath had and still hath his
factors and agents in Roane and Cadiz and hath within the sayd tyme
sent and remitted severall good quantityes of money and ordered bills of
exchange to Roane for the buying of linnen there and sending
the same to Cadiz from thence for and upon his owne accompt
And further he cannot depose.

To the second third and fourth articles of the sayd allegation This deponent
saith that in the monethes of August September October November
December January ffebruary and March 1652. and allso in March and
April 1653 last past the arlate James Pinquet was Owner and Proprietor
of 132 baeles of linnen of severall sorts and numbers marked as in the
margent, and that within and for  and during all the sayd monethes
the arlate Jaques ffermanel of Roan was and att present is the
factor and Agent of the sayd James Pinquet, and that about the
sayd month of July 1652 the sayd James Pinquet did give order to the sayd
ffermanel to buy and provide for him the sayd Pinquet a large
quantity
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.704r Annotate
quantity of linnen Cloth and that the sayd ffermanell should send the same
to Cadiz for the accompt of the sayd Pinquett and that according to
the sayd Order the arlate ffermanel in or about the sayd moneth of July
And August 1652 did by and provide the sayd one hundred thirty two
bales of linnen, and marked them as aforesayd and afterwards did lade
the same on board the arlate shipp the Nightingale whereof Hendrick
Glashogen was Master, for accompt of the sayd James Pinquet to be
transported to Cadiz and there delivered for accompt aforesayd to the
factor of the sayd producent. The premisses This deponent knoweth to be
true for that being bookeholder and Cashier to the sayd James Pinquet
he did about the beginning of July copie and enter into that sayd
james Pinquetts bookes the letters of advise and order which he wrote
and sent to the sayd ffermanel for the buying of the sayd linnen
and saith that after the buying of the
sayd goods he did receyve and read severall letters of advise written
by the sayd ffermanel directed to the sayd James Pinquet  and into his hand delivered by this deponent att Antwerpe
dated some in January 1653 new stile being January 1652 english stile
in which letters the sayd ffermanel did certify that he had bought the
sayd bales of linnen and marked and laden them as aforesayd
and saith that in the sayd
letters or some of them were severall Invoyces and factories of
the buying and accompts of the sayd linnen sent which Invoyces this
deponent likewise receyved and entred the same with his owne hand
into the bookes of Accompts of the producent. And saith that he as Cashier to the sayd Jacques Pinquet did
so receyve all the sayd letters of advise and sayd factories or Invoyces
and entred the same as aforesayd long before the seizing or takeing of the
bales now claymed by Captaine Baddiley videlicet before the end of January 1652
English stile.
And otherwise he saith he cannot depose. [##]

[##] [LH MARGIN]
saving that after the sayd ffermanel had bought the linnen he did according to order to him by the sayd James Pinquet in
that behalfe given draw bills of exchange for the same upon the sayd James Pinquet which this deponent saw him the
producent accept and subscribe in or about the moneth of September 1652 and this deponent did himselfe by the producents order and with his money and on his behalfe and name
really satisfy the sayd bills of exchange by paying the moneyes in them mentioned long before the surprizall of the goods in question to the severall persons to who the same
were payeable
ffrancisco Boesdonck [SIGNATURE, LH MARGIN]

To the [?fifth] and [?ixth] articles of the sayd allegation This deponent saith that
about the moneth of May last past 1653. he saw and read a letter
sent to the sayd James Pinquet att Antwerpe from his factor or
Agent att Cadiz Juan Henricques de Messa where in and where by
the sayd Juan Henruicques de Messa did Certify the sayd James
Pinquett that the sayd shipp the Nightingale did safely arrive att
Cadiz with one hundred thirty two bales of linnen marked 'S' thereon (being
the 132 bales aforementioned) and that the sayd Hendrick
Glashogen did unlade and deliver out of the sayd shipp unto him
the sayd de Messa one hundred and nineteene of the sayd bales of
linnen and noe more; and that whilest the sayd shipp was in
delivereing
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.704v Annotate
delivering of her lading Captaine Badily Commander of
a squadron of English shippes. (meaning Captaine Badiley
commander of a squadron of shipps in the service of this Commonwealth
arlate) came into the bay of Cadiz where the sayd
shipp Nightingale then did ride and was delivering the sayd
linnens, and that by order of the sayd Baddiley some of the Company
of the sayd English shipps did take out of the sayd shipp Nightingale
thirteene bales of linnen marked 'S' and numbred .129
141. 153. 173. 182. 302. 315. 318. 310. 324. R. V. X.
being part of the sayd 132 bales of linnen which arrived
att Cadiz as aforesayd from Roane upon and for accompt of the
sayd James Pinquett, and that the sayd Badiley had caused the
sayd 13 bales so marked to be putt into some of the
English shipps that he had with him. And further he
saith he cannot depose saving that he hath seene the sayd 13
bales of linnen so marked and numbred in the prize office
here in London and doth beleive they were thither brought from
Cadiz in some of the sayd English shippes; and saveing that
for the reasons aforesayd he knoweth that the sayd thirteene bales
of linnen att the tyme of their sayd takeing away out of the
Nightingale by Captaine Badily (which was, as the sayd de Masses
letters did intemat in or about the month of March 1652 english
stile or March last past before this instant March now current did really and truely belong and
appertaine unto the sayd James Pinquet being bought and laden for
his use and accompt as aforesayd. And otherwise he cannot depose

To the 7th article he saith he cannot depose

To the 8th article he saith he cannot depose.

To the Crosse Interrogatories. [CENTRE HEADING]

To the 1. he saith he is a native and Inhabitant of Antwerpe where he
hath lived all his tyme. and further otherwise then negatively cannot
depose saving that he is Booke holder and Cashier to the producent
and liveth in howse with him.

To the .2. he saith that the howse of the sayd James Pinquet is scituat
in the Hopelandt street in Antwerpe. and further saving as aforesayd
he cannot depose.

To the .3. he saith he knoweth not the person of Jacques ffermanel aforesayd
but by Correspondencyes hath knowne him two yeares for and
during which tyme he hath lived as should seeme by his letters att
Rohan in ffrance. And further he cannot depose.

To the 4th he saith he was not present att nor saw the buying of the
sayd linnen. and for and touching the propriety thereof cannot
further depose than as aforesayd.

To the .5th he saith he knoweth that the sayd James Pinquet and Jacques
ffermanel are not partners together in trade nor have any ioynt [?XXX]
for such goods as they send to each other but knoweth that the sayd Jacques ffer=
manel for theis 2. yeares last past or thereabouts hath bene and is
the factor or Agent of the sayd James Pinquet and receiving payment
of factory for all busines which he doth for the sayd Pinquet.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.705r Annotate
To the sixth he saith he knoweth not whether the sayd ffermanell doth
trade for himselfe or not, but knoweth well that the sayd James Pinquet
for theise 6 yeares last past never was his factor nor hath done any
business for him in merchandizing, nor hath ever receyved provision
or factorage from him the sayd ffermanell.

To the seventh Interrogatory he saith that the sayd linnen was laden  in the
Nightingale as by letters did appeare about January 1652 English stile and
this Rendent knoweth that before that tyme the sayd ffermanel
had severall parcells of money in his hands of good value
amounting in the whole to 16 thousand Crownes or thereabouts
sent to him by the producents order from Cadiz by the producents
factor there about the latter end of the yeare 1652 in the
shipps of one Gantzbergh and one Colebrabrands of Hamborough
and otherwise he saith he cannot depose.

To the 8th he saith he knoweth nothing thereof.

To the 9th he saith the foresayd order for buying of the sayd linnen
in letters of advise under the hand of the sayd Pinquet, the
delivery whereof to the sayd ffermanel this Rendent saw not
but byt letters from the sayd ffermanel did come to knowe that the
same were receaved by the sayd ffermanel before the buying of the sayd
linnen. and he knoweth by the sayd ffermandels letters that the foresayd 16000 Crownes or thereabouts came
to the hands of the sayd ffermanel within 12 monethes next
before the lading but not befopre the sayd order given for buying of the sayd linnen. and
further referring himselfe to his forgoeing depositions
he saith he cannot depose.

To the 1oth Interrogatory he saith he saw the sayd bills of exchange
and knoweth that they were drawne upon James Pinquet
himselfe.

To the 11th Interrogatory he saith the foresayd bills of exchange so
drawne upon the sayd James Pinquett were 6 in number and the
the moneyes therein drawne payeable to the parties
hereafter named. and this Rendent saw the sayd james Pinqeut
accepting the same and subscribe his name to them and this deponent
himselfe in or about the moneth of December 1652 did
with his owne hands on behalfe of the sayd James Pinquett pay
the money in the sayd bills mentioned to the severall persons
to whom the same were payeable. videlicet to the widow of
Nicholas Ginderdouren en Bacquer 3000. Crownes. to
John Augustine Semino 1000. Crownes. to Jacques Van
Eycke 3000. Crownes. to Jaques Godschiel an
Englishman 2500 Crownes. To Luis and Robert
Locandel 3500 Crownes. and to Joan Estevan
Spinola 2000 Crownes. And otherwise he cannot depose.

To
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.705v Annotate
To the 12th he saith he did not see the sayd ffermanel send the
sayd letters and Invoyces to Jaques Pinquet but saith he this Rendent did
himselfe receyve the same att the post office in Antwerpe from the
sayd ffermanel and did deliver them to the sayd James Pinquet
some in August, some in September some in DEcember and some
in January 1652 English stile, and saith that the
generall factorie of the foresayd bales of linnen this REndent
receyved from the sayd ffermanel and delivered to the sayd James Pinquet
in  January 1652 English stile, and saith that the  effect and
tenor of the sayd letters and factoryes were for and to the effect
by him above sett forth in his foregoeing deposition whereto
he referreth himselfe. And further he cannot depose.

To the 13. he saith the name of the producents factor att Cadiz
to whom the sayd 119 bales were delivered is Juan Henricques de Mesa 
a native of Ipre in fflanders, and he hath about 5
yeares last ben knowne to this Rendent to live att Cadiz, and there
he hath lived for some tyme longer as this Rendent hath heard
and further he cannot depose.

To the 14th he saith he is fully convinced in his conscience that
noe part of the linnen nowe claymed doth belong to any Dutchman
or Dutchmen subiects of the States of the United Provinces or to any
ffrench man or ffrench men subiects of the ffrench King.

To the 15th Interrogatory This Rendent saith that in the moneth of ffebruary
1652 English stile there were Insurances made by
the sayd James Pinquet upon the sayd 132 bales of linnen of
which the 13 bayles now claymed are a part. videlicet. the value
of 2700 poound flemish att Antwerpe, And the Insurers were
Jacques Douglas dit Scott Pedro de Haze. Nicholas [?Chens]. ffrancisco [?schilders]
Jan Shewin. Adrian Tongerlou. Jan Versprit. Jan Baptista
Grassis. Jacques Domis. Peter Vermauden. Gilbert fferva [?XXXXX]
Aurelio Martins. Antonio van Dentzyck Jacques Bollart, and
Johan de Haze. all Antwerpians and subiects of the King of
Spaine and living in Antwerpe. And the value of 700.
pound flemish att Hamburgh, assured by  the widdow of Daniel
Sloyer. and by Daniel Brandts. and one Walter Boschart, all Hamburghers
And further otherwise then negatively he cannot depose.

To the 16th Interrogatory he saith that the foresayd linnen Cloath was and is
of the manufacture of ffrance and was laden att Rohan by the [?fore]
sayd Jaques ffermanel for accompt of the sayd James Pinquet
as aforesayd. And further otherwise than negatively hee saith
he cannot depose.

ffrancisco Boesdonck [SIGNATURE, RH SIDE]
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.706r Annotate
BLANK MANUSCRIPT PAGE
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.706v Annotate
BLANK MANUSCRIPT PAGE
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.707r Annotate
BLANK MANUSCRIPT PAGE
~~~
HCA 13/68 f.707v Annotate
BLANK MANUSCRIPT PAGE
